Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026

HISTORY OF CHANGES

Version

Publication Date

1.0

01.04.2026 ▪ Initial version.

▪

▪

▪

Change

Page

2

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026
CALL FOR PROPOSALS
EUROPEAN COMMISSION
Directorate-General for Communications Networks, Content and Technology
CNECT.R– Resources CNECT.R.5 – Programme Implementation
Objectives ............................................................................................................................... 5 Scope...................................................................................................................................... 5 Outcomes and deliverables ........................................................................................................ 6 KPIs to measure outcomes and deliverables ................................................................................. 7 Targeted stakeholders ............................................................................................................... 7 Type of action and funding rate .................................................................................................. 7 Specific topic conditions............................................................................................................. 7 Eligible participants (eligible countries)........................................................................................ 9 Consortium composition ...........................................................................................................10 Ethics .....................................................................................................................................11 Security..................................................................................................................................11 Financial capacity ....................................................................................................................12 Operational capacity ................................................................................................................13 Exclusion ................................................................................................................................13 Starting date and project duration .............................................................................................17 Milestones and deliverables.......................................................................................................17 Form of grant, funding rate and maximum grant amount..............................................................17 Prefinancing guarantees ...........................................................................................................19 Certificates .............................................................................................................................19 Liability regime for recoveries ...................................................................................................20 Provisions concerning the project implementation ........................................................................20 Other specificities ....................................................................................................................21 Non-compliance and breach of contract ......................................................................................21
0. Introduction This is a call for proposals for EU action grants in the field of Dissemination and Exploitation D&E) for the Digital Europe Programme under the Digital Europe Programme (DIGITAL). The regulatory framework for this EU Funding Programme is set out in:
3

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026

− Regulation 2024/2509 (EU Financial Regulation)1 − the basic act (Digital Europe Regulation 2021/6942).

The call is launched in accordance with the 2025-2027 Work Programme3 and will be managed by the European Commission, Directorate-General for Communication, Networks, Content and Technology (DG CONNECT).

The call covers the following topics:

−

DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10-DISSEMINATION — Support to

Dissemination and Exploitation (D&E) for the Digital Europe

Programme

Each project application under the call must address only one of these topics. Applicants wishing to apply for more than one topic, must submit a separate proposal under each topic.

We invite you to read the call documentation carefully, and in particular this Call document, the Model Grant Agreement, the EU Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual and the EU Grants AGA — Annotated Grant Agreement.

These documents provide clarifications and answers to questions you may have when preparing your application:

−

the Call document outlines the:

− background, objectives, scope, outcomes and deliverables, KPIs to measure outcomes and deliverables, targeted stakeholders, type of action and funding rate and specific topic conditions (sections 1 and 2)

− timetable and available budget (sections 3 and 4)

− admissibility and eligibility conditions (including mandatory documents; sections 5 and 6)

− criteria for financial and operational capacity and exclusion (section 7)

− evaluation and award procedure (section 8)

− award criteria (section 9)

− legal and financial set-up of the Grant Agreements (section 10)

− how to submit an application (section 11).

−

the Online Manual outlines the:

− procedures to register and submit proposals online via the EU Funding & Tenders Portal (‘Portal’)

− recommendations for the preparation of the application.

1 Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2024/2509 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 September 2024 on the financial rules applicable to the general budget of the Union (recast) (‘EU Financial Regulation’) (OJ L, 2024/2509, 26.9.2024).
2 Regulation (EU) 2021/694 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2021 establishing the Digital Europe Programme (OJ L 166, 11.5.2021, p. 1).
3 Commission Implementing Decision C(2026) 1781 final of 19/03/2026 amending Implementing Decision C(2025)1839 on the financing of the Digital Europe Programme and the adoption of the multiannual work programme 2025-2027
4

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026

−

the AGA — Annotated Grant Agreement contains:

− detailed annotations on all the provisions in the Grant Agreement you will have to sign in order to obtain the grant (including cost eligibility, payment schedule, accessory obligations, etc).

You are also encouraged to visit the EU Funding & Tenders Portal to consult the list of projects funded previously.

1. Background
The Digital Europe Programme seeks to improve the valorisation of project results and their effective uptake. Dissemination and Exploitation (D&E) activities are therefore expected to make a substantive contribution to the achievement of the Programme’s objectives.
The actions funded by the programme need to implement efficient and targeted dissemination and exploitation activities to increase the impact of EU funding. Beyond the D&E works of individual projects, the programme funds support activities in certain thematic fields which support the projects in the respective area4.
Additionally, there is a clear need for a programme-wide perspective on D&E. An ongoing coordination and support action (DEDEP.eu) is designing a conceptual and operational framework for the implementation of effective D&E activities in the programme, helping funded projects to strategically share results with relevant stakeholders and building a corpus of reusable materials and tools.
The programme is now entering a pivotal phase in which many initiatives are delivering tangible results. Placing a strong emphasis on the dissemination and exploitation of these outcomes will ensure the wider uptake of existing and forthcoming results, and significantly amplify the overall impact of the programme.

2. Objectives — Scope — Outcomes and deliverables — KPIs to measure outcomes and deliverables — Targeted stakeholders — Type of action and funding rate — Specific topic conditions
DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10-DISSEMINATION — Support to Dissemination and Exploitation (D&E) for the Digital Europe Programme
Objectives
Maximise the impact of the Digital Europe Programme and the take up of its results through a Dissemination and Exploitation (D&E) operational framework and the implementation of practical actions supported by appropriate tools. The action will leverage programme-level D&E efforts already in place and enhance them.
Scope
The action will address, at least, the following dimensions:

4 for example https://coordinatef.eu/ https://advancedskills.eu/ https://dssc.eu/
5

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026
• the overall programme, its Specific Objectives (SO) and areas therein, down to topics and projects where appropriate, across funding instruments in particular grants, procurements and financial instruments;
• the capacity building and use strands of Digital Europe Programme, taking into account the type of result5 and its dissemination and exploitation audience;
• the different types of organisations participating in the programme; • the different stakeholders, including final adopters and/or users of the results; • the stages of the project lifecycle and the reporting obligations; • the security and strategic autonomy specificities of the programme, including
the implications in the use of critical infrastructures and exploitation of results; • coordination within EU and beyond when relevant, taking into account the
policy priorities and initiatives; o within the Digital Europe Programme itself, identifying and exploiting complementarities of projects among SO and topics, including SO specific coordination and support actions and project aggregators; o between the Digital Europe Programme, other EU programmes and national/regional programmes; o of the different programme’s implementing bodies, e.g. European Commission, Health and Digital Executive Agency (HaDEA), Joint Undertakings (JUs) and similar bodies, taking into account their specificities in the handling of results resulting from their actions. The action will complement and enrich the D&E activities of the programme’s projects. The action will provide means that can help deliver its objective, including leveraging already existing tools, e.g. of other EU programmes, and the use of innovative approaches to D&E. The action will promote the uptake of Digital Europe Programme results beyond the entities directly involved in the programme’s projects.
Outcomes and deliverables
• Optimisation of the operational framework for D&E for the Digital Europe Programme taking into account the elements mentioned under “scope”, with solid methodological and practical approaches.
• Identification of distinct types of adopters and the creation of a taxonomy articulating their respective interests and needs.
• Support to projects in the preparation and execution of D&E activities, including valorisation and uptake of results via advisory, business support and acceleration services
• A plan to deliver on the operational framework backed by monitoring and evaluation metrics.
• The delivery of actions implementing the operational framework and involving stakeholders as appropriate, including sector specific and programme-wide events.
• The means and tools to facilitate the delivery of the operational framework, including functional and technical requirements for a dedicated results platform.
• A plan for the sustainability of the operational framework and the actions implemented by the project.
• The dissemination and exploitation of results (including the access to infrastructures) in the specific context of security restrictions and the protection of EU interests overall.
5 Results’ means any tangible or intangible effect of the action, such as data, know-how or information, whatever its form or nature, whether or not it can be protected, as well as any rights attached to it, including intellectual property rights
6

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026
• Produce a data base with concrete cases of DEP results, across all Specific Objectives and Implementing bodies, with exemplary dissemination and use of results.
KPIs to measure outcomes and deliverables
• Number of stakeholders to participate in the framework and actions proposed. • The degree to which the diversity of the programme has been considered
(Programme Specific Objectives, implementing bodies, implementing instruments, technologies and stakeholders).
• Number of activities from the framework delivered within the lifetime of the
project.
• Number of initiatives actively supported in their dissemination & exploitation
efforts. • % of initiatives actively using provided D&E tools and methodologies. • Number of business organisations, SMEs and small mid-cap companies,
including startups and scaleups benefitting from the framework and receiving support and assistance for access to technologies, technology infrastructure and facilities • Number of dissemination events and participants in those events. • % of tools and methodologies usable beyond project/programme lifetime. • % of project results included in the data base.
Targeted stakeholders
Entities targeted by this call should have experience in D&E in Information and Communication Technologies. Familiarity with the programme and/or involvement in key programme activities/actions is an asset.
Stakeholders targeted by the proposal are participants in EU funded initiatives. End users of the results, especially SMEs but also among public administrations, European institutions, Private sector, academic institutions should benefit from the activities in this action.
Type of action and funding rate
Coordination and Support Actions — 100% funding rate
For more information on Digital Europe types of action, see Annex 1.
Specific topic conditions
− For this topic, following reimbursement option for equipment costs applies: depreciation only (see section 10)
− For this topic, access rights to ensure continuity and interoperability obligations apply (see section 10)
− The following parts of the award criteria in section 9 are exceptionally NOT applicable for this topic:
− extent to which the project would reinforce and secure the digital technology supply chain in the Union
− extent to which the proposal can overcome financial obstacles such as the lack of market finance
7

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026

3. Available budget

The estimated available call budget is EUR 1 800 000. Specific budget information per topic can be found in the table below:

Topic
DIGITAL-2026-PROGRAM-SUPPORT-10DISSEMINATION — Support to Dissemination and Exploitation (D&E

Topic budget EUR 1.8 million

We reserve the right not to award all available funds or to redistribute them between the call priorities, depending on the proposals received and the results of the evaluation.

4. Timetable and deadlines
Timetable and deadlines (indicative) Call opening: Deadline for submission:
Evaluation: Information on evaluation results: GA signature:

21 April 2026 01 October 2026 – 17:00:00 CEST
(Brussels) October-November 2026
January-February2027 May-June 2027

5. Admissibility and documents Proposals must be submitted before the call deadline (see timetable section 4). Proposals must be submitted electronically via the Funding & Tenders Portal Electronic Submission System (accessible via the Topic page in the Calls for proposals section). Paper submissions are NOT possible. Proposals (including annexes and supporting documents) must be submitted using the forms provided inside the Submission System ( NOT the documents available on the Topic page — they are only for information). Proposals must be complete and contain all the requested information and all required annexes and supporting documents:
8

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026
− Application Form Part A — contains administrative information about the participants (future coordinator, beneficiaries and affiliated entities) and the summarised budget for the project (to be filled in directly online)
− Application Form Part B — contains the technical description of the project (template to be downloaded from the Portal Submission System, completed, assembled and re-uploaded)
− mandatory annexes and supporting documents (templates to be downloaded from the Portal Submission System, completed, assembled and reuploaded): − CVs of core project team: not applicable − activity reports of last year: not applicable − List of previous projects (key projects for the last 4 years) (template available in Part B)
At proposal submission, you will have to confirm that you have the mandate to act for all applicants. Moreover, you will have to confirm that the information in the application is correct and complete and that all participants comply with the conditions for receiving EU funding (especially eligibility, financial and operational capacity, exclusion, etc). Before signing the grant, each beneficiary and affiliated entity will have to confirm this again by signing a declaration of honour (DoH). Proposals without full support will be rejected. Your application must be readable, accessible and printable (please check carefully the layout of the documents uploaded).
Proposals are limited to maximum 50 pages (Part B). Evaluators will not consider any additional pages.
You may be asked at a later stage for further documents (for legal entity validation, financial capacity check, bank account validation, etc).
For more information about the submission process (including IT aspects), consult the Online Manual.
6. Eligibility
Eligible participants (eligible countries)
In order to be eligible, the applicants (beneficiaries and affiliated entities) must: − be legal entities (public or private bodies) − be established in one of the eligible countries, i.e.: − EU Member States (including overseas countries and territories (OCTs)) − non-EU countries
− listed EEA countries and countries associated to the Digital Europe
Programme (list of participating countries)
Beneficiaries and affiliated entities must register in the Participant Register — before submitting the proposal — and will have to be validated by the Central Validation Service (REA Validation). For the validation, they will be requested to upload documents showing legal status and origin.
9

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026
Other entities may participate in other consortium roles, such as associated partners, subcontractors, third parties giving in-kind contributions, etc (see section 13).
Specific cases and definitions
Natural persons — Natural persons are NOT eligible (with the exception of selfemployed persons, i.e. sole traders, where the company does not have legal personality separate from that of the natural person).
International organisations — International organisations are NOT eligible, unless they are International organisations of European Interest within the meaning of Article 2 of the Digital Europe Regulation (i.e. international organisations the majority of whose members are Member States or whose headquarters are in a Member State).
Entities without legal personality — Entities which do not have legal personality under their national law may exceptionally participate, provided that their representatives have the capacity to undertake legal obligations on their behalf, and offer guarantees for the protection of the EU financial interests equivalent to that offered by legal persons6.
EU bodies — EU bodies (with the exception of the European Commission Joint Research Centre) can NOT be part of the consortium.
Associations and interest groupings — Entities composed of members may participate as ‘sole beneficiaries’ or ‘beneficiaries without legal personality’7. Please note that if the action will be implemented by the members, they should also participate (either as beneficiaries or as affiliated entities, otherwise their costs will NOT be eligible).
Countries currently negotiating association agreements — Beneficiaries from countries with ongoing negotiations for participating in the programme (see list of participating countries above) may participate in the call and can sign grants if the negotiations are concluded before grant signature and if the association covers the call (i.e. is retroactive and covers both the part of the programme and the year when the call was launched).
EU restrictive measures — Special rules apply for entities subject to EU restrictive measures under Article 29 of the Treaty on the European Union (TEU) and Article 215 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU (TFEU)8. Such entities are not eligible to participate in any capacity, including as beneficiaries, affiliated entities, associated partners, subcontractors or recipients of financial support to third parties (if any).
EU conditionality measures — Special rules apply for entities subject to measures adopted on the basis of EU Regulation 2020/2092. Such entities are not eligible to participate in any funded role (beneficiaries, affiliated entities, subcontractors, recipients of financial support to third parties, etc). Currently such measures are in place for Hungarian public interest trusts established under the Hungarian Act IX of 2021 or any entity they maintain (see Council Implementing Decision (EU) 2022/2506, as of 16 December 2022).
For more information, see Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment.
Consortium composition
n/a
6 See Article 200(2)(c) EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509. 7 For the definitions, see Articles 190(2) and 200(2)(c) EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509. 8 Please note that the EU Official Journal contains the official list and, in case of conflict, its content prevails
over that of the EU Sanctions Map.
10

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026
Eligible activities
Applications will only be considered eligible if their content corresponds wholly (or at least in part) to the topic description for which they are submitted.
Eligible activities are the ones set out in section 2 above.
Projects should take into account the results of projects supported by other EU funding programmes. The complementarities must be described in the project proposals (Part B of the Application Form).
Projects must comply with EU policy interests and priorities (such as environment, social, security, industrial and trade policy, etc). Projects must also respect EU values and European Commission policy regarding reputational matters (e.g. activities involving capacity building, policy support, awareness raising, communication, dissemination, etc).
Financial support to third parties is not allowed.
Geographic location (target countries)
Ethics
Projects must comply with:
− highest ethical standards and − applicable EU, international and national law (including the General Data
Protection Regulation 2016/679). Proposals under this call will have to undergo an ethics review to authorise funding and may be made subject to specific ethics rules (which become part of the Grant Agreement in the form of ethics deliverables, e.g. ethics committee opinions/notifications/authorisations required under national or EU law).
For proposals involving development, testing, deployment, use or distribution of AI systems, the ethics review will in particular check compliance with the principles of human agency and oversight, diversity/fairness, transparency and responsible social impact, while the experts performing the technical evaluation will assess the robustness of the AI systems (i.e. their reliability not to cause unintentional harm).
Security
Projects involving EU classified information must undergo security scrutiny to authorise funding and may be made subject to specific security rules (detailed in a security aspects letter (SAL) which is annexed to the Grant Agreement).
These rules (governed by Decision 2015/4449 and its implementing rules and/or national rules) provide for instance that:
− projects involving information classified TRES SECRET UE/EU TOP SECRET (or
equivalent) can NOT be funded
− classified information must be marked in accordance with the applicable security
instructions in the SAL
− information with classification levels CONFIDENTIEL UE/EU CONFIDENTIAL or
above (and RESTREINT UE/ EU RESTRICTED, if required by national rules) may
9 See Commission Decision 2015/444/EU, Euratom of 13 March 2015 on the security rules for protecting EU classified information (OJ L 72, 17.3.2015, p. 53).
11

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026
be:
− created or accessed only on premises with facility security clearance
(FSC) from the competent national security authority (NSA), in accordance with the national rules
− handled only in a secured area accredited by the competent NSA
− accessed and handled only by persons with valid personnel security
clearance (PSC) and a need-to-know
− at the end of the grant, the classified information must either be returned or
continue to be protected in accordance with the applicable rules
− action tasks involving EU classified information (EUCI) may be subcontracted
only with prior written approval from the granting authority and only to entities established in an EU Member State or in a non-EU country with a security of information agreement with the EU (or an administrative arrangement with the Commission)
− disclosure of EUCI to third parties is subject to prior written approval from the
granting authority.
Please note that, depending on the type of activity, facility security clearance may have to be provided before grant signature. The granting authority will assess the need for clearance in each case and will establish their delivery date during grant preparation. Please note that in no circumstances can we sign any grant agreement until at least one of the beneficiaries in a consortium has facility security clearance.
Further security recommendations may be added to the Grant Agreement in the form of security deliverables (e.g. create security advisory group, limit level of detail, use fake scenario, exclude use of classified information, etc).
Beneficiaries must ensure that their projects are not subject to national/third-country security requirements that could affect implementation or put into question the award of the grant (e.g. technology restrictions, national security classification, etc). The granting authority must be notified immediately of any potential security issues.
7. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion
Financial capacity
Applicants must have stable and sufficient resources to successfully implement the projects and contribute their share. Organisations participating in several projects must have sufficient capacity to implement all projects.
The financial capacity check will be carried out on the basis of the documents you will be requested to upload in the Participant Register during grant preparation (e.g. profit and loss account and balance sheet, business plan, audit report produced by an approved external auditor, certifying the accounts for the last closed financial year, etc). The analysis will be based on neutral financial indicators, but will also take into account other aspects, such as dependency on EU funding and deficit and revenue in previous years.
The check will normally be done for all beneficiaries, except:
− public bodies (entities established as public body under national law, including
local, regional or national authorities) or international organisations
− if the individual requested grant amount is not more than EUR 60 000.
If needed, it may also be done for affiliated entities.
12

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026
If we consider that your financial capacity is not satisfactory, we may require:
− further information − an enhanced financial responsibility regime, i.e. joint and several responsibility
for all beneficiaries or joint and several liability of affiliated entities (see below, section 10)
− prefinancing paid in instalments − (one or more) prefinancing guarantees (see below, section 10)
or
− propose no prefinancing − request that you are replaced or, if needed, reject the entire proposal.
For more information, see Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment.
Operational capacity
Applicants must have the know-how, qualifications and resources to successfully implement the projects and contribute their share (including sufficient experience in projects of comparable size and nature).
This capacity will be assessed together with the ‘Implementation’ award criterion, on the basis of the competence and experience of the applicants and their project teams, including operational resources (human, technical and other) or, exceptionally, the measures proposed to obtain it by the time the task implementation starts.
If the evaluation of the award criterion is positive, the applicants are considered to have sufficient operational capacity.
Applicants will have to show their capacity via the following information:
− general profiles (qualifications and experiences) of the staff responsible for
managing and implementing the project
− description of the consortium participants
− list of previous projects (key projects for the last 4 years) (template available in Part B).
Additional supporting documents may be requested, if needed to confirm the operational capacity of any applicant.
Exclusion
Applicants which are subject to an EU exclusion decision or in one of the following exclusion situations that bar them from receiving EU funding can NOT participate10:
− bankruptcy, winding up, affairs administered by the courts, arrangement with creditors, suspended business activities or other similar procedures (including procedures for persons with unlimited liability for the applicant’s debts)
− in breach of social security or tax obligations (including if done by persons with unlimited liability for the applicant’s debts)
10 See Articles 138 and 143 of EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509.
13

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026
− guilty of grave professional misconduct11 (including if done by persons having powers of representation, decision-making or control, beneficial owners or persons who are essential for the award/implementation of the grant.
− committed fraud, corruption, links to a criminal organisation, money laundering, terrorism-related crimes (including terrorism financing), child labour or human trafficking (including if done by persons having powers of representation, decision-making or control, beneficial owners or persons who are essential for the award/implementation of the grant.
− shown significant deficiencies in complying with main obligations under an EU procurement contract, grant agreement, prize, expert contract, or similar (including if done by persons having powers of representation, decision-making or control, beneficial owners or persons who are essential for the award/implementation of the grant.
− guilty of irregularities within the meaning of Article 1(2) of EU Regulation 2988/95 (including if done by persons having powers of representation, decision-making or control, beneficial owners or persons who are essential for the award/implementation of the grant.
− created under a different jurisdiction with the intent to circumvent fiscal, social or other legal obligations in the country of origin or created another entity with this purpose (including if done by persons having powers of representation, decision-making or control, beneficial owners or persons who are essential for the award/implementation of the grant.
− intentionally and without proper justification resisted12 an investigation, check or audit carried out by an EU authorising officer (or their representative or auditor), OLAF, the EPPO, or the European Court of Auditors.
Applicants will also be rejected if it turns out that13:
− during the award procedure they misrepresented information required as a condition for participating or failed to supply that information
− they were previously involved in the preparation of the call and this entails a distortion of competition that cannot be remedied otherwise (conflict of interest).
8. Evaluation and award procedure
The proposals will have to follow the standard submission and evaluation procedure (one-stage submission + one-step evaluation).
An evaluation committee (assisted by independent outside experts) will assess all applications. Proposals will first be checked for formal requirements (admissibility, and eligibility, see sections 5 and 6). Proposals found admissible and eligible will be
11 ‘Professional misconduct’ includes, in particular, the following: violation of ethical standards of the profession; wrongful conduct with impact on professional credibility; breach of generally accepted professional ethical standards; false declarations/misrepresentation of information; participation in a cartel or other agreement distorting competition; violation of IPR; attempting to influence decisionmaking processes by taking advantage, through misrepresentation, of a conflict of interests, or to obtain confidential information from public authorities to gain an advantage; incitement to discrimination, hatred or violence or similar activities contrary to the EU values where negatively affecting or risking to affect the performance of a legal commitment.
12 ‘Resisting an investigation, check or audit’ means carrying out actions with the goal or effect of preventing, hindering or delaying the conduct of any of the activities needed to perform the investigation, check or audit, such as refusing to grant the necessary access to its premises or any other areas used for business purposes, concealing or refusing to disclose information or providing false information.
13 See Article 143 EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509.
14

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026
evaluated against the operational capacity and award criteria (see sections 7 and 9) and then ranked according to their scores.
For proposals with the same score (within a topic or budget envelope) a priority order will be determined according to the following approach:
Successively for every group of ex aequo proposals, starting with the highest scored group, and continuing in descending order:
1) Proposals focusing on a theme that is not otherwise covered by higher ranked proposals will be considered to have the highest priority.
2) The ex aequo proposals within the same topic will be prioritised according to the scores they have been awarded for the award criterion ‘Relevance’. When these scores are equal, priority will be based on their scores for the criterion ‘Impact’. When these scores are equal, priority will be based on their scores for the criterion ‘Implementation’.
3) If this does not allow to determine the priority, a further prioritisation can be done by considering the overall proposal portfolio and the creation of positive synergies between proposals, or other factors related to the objectives of the call. These factors will be documented in the panel report.
4) After that, the remainder of the available call budget will be used to fund projects across the different topics in order to ensure a balanced spread of the geographical and thematic coverage and while respecting to the maximum possible extent the order of merit based on the evaluation of the award criteria.
All proposals will be informed about the evaluation result (evaluation result letter). Successful proposals will be invited for grant preparation; the other ones will be put on the reserve list or rejected.
No commitment for funding — Invitation to grant preparation does NOT constitute a formal commitment for funding. We will still need to make various legal checks before grant award: legal entity validation, financial capacity, exclusion check, etc.
Grant preparation will involve a dialogue in order to fine-tune technical or financial aspects of the project and may require extra information from your side. It may also include adjustments to the proposal to address recommendations of the evaluation committee or other concerns. Full compliance will be a pre-condition for signing the grant.
If you believe that the evaluation procedure was flawed, you can submit a complaint (following the deadlines and procedures set out in the evaluation result letter). Please note that notifications which have not been opened within 10 days after sending will be considered to have been accessed and that deadlines will be counted from opening/access (see also Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions). Please also be aware that for complaints submitted electronically, there may be character limitations.
9. Award criteria
The award criteria for this call are as follows:
1. Relevance
− Alignment with the objectives and activities as described in section 2
15

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026

− Contribution to long-term policy objectives, relevant policies and strategies, and synergies with activities at European and national level
− Extent to which the project would reinforce and secure the digital technology supply chain in the EU*
− Extent to which the project can overcome financial obstacles such as the lack of market finance*
2. Implementation
− Maturity of the project
− Soundness of the implementation plan and efficient use of resources
− Capacity of the applicants, and when applicable the consortium as a whole, to carry out the proposed work
3. Impact
− Extent to which the project will achieve the expected outcomes and deliverables referred to in the call for proposals and, where relevant, the plans to disseminate and communicate project achievements
− Extent to which the project will strengthen competitiveness and bring important benefits for society
− Extent to which the project addresses environmental sustainability and the European Green Deal goals, in terms of direct effects and/or in awareness of environmental effects *.
*May not be applicable to all topics (see specific topic conditions in section 2).

Award criteria
Relevance Implementation Impact Overall (pass) scores

Minimum pass score
3 3 3 10

Maximum score 5 5 5 15

Maximum points: 15 points.
Individual thresholds per criterion: 3/5, 3/5 and 3/5 points.
Overall threshold: 10 points.
Proposals that pass the individual thresholds AND the overall threshold will be considered for funding — within the limits of the available budget (i.e. up to the budget ceiling). Other proposals will be rejected.
10. Legal and financial set-up of the Grant Agreements
If you pass evaluation, your project will be invited for grant preparation, where you will be asked to prepare the Grant Agreement together with the EU Project Officer.

16

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026
This Grant Agreement will set the framework for your grant and its terms and conditions, in particular concerning deliverables, reporting and payments.
The Model Grant Agreement that will be used (and all other relevant templates and guidance documents) can be found on Portal Reference Documents.
Starting date and project duration
The project starting date and duration will be fixed in the Grant Agreement (Data Sheet, point 1). Normally the starting date will be after grant signature. A retroactive starting date can be granted exceptionally for duly justified reasons — but never earlier than the proposal submission date.
Project duration: 36 months.
Extensions are possible, if duly justified and through an amendment.
Milestones and deliverables
The milestones and deliverables for each project will be managed through the Portal Grant Management System and will be reflected in Annex 1 of the Grant Agreement.
The following deliverables will be mandatory for all projects:
− additional deliverable on dissemination and exploitation, to be submitted in the first six months of the project
Form of grant, funding rate and maximum grant amount
The grant parameters (maximum grant amount, funding rate, total eligible costs, etc) will be fixed in the Grant Agreement (Data Sheet, point 3 and art 5).
Project budget (requested grant amount):
− 1 800 000 EUR per project
The grant awarded may be lower than the amount requested.
The grant will be a budget-based mixed actual cost grant (actual costs, with unit cost and flat-rate elements). This means that it will reimburse ONLY certain types of costs (eligible costs) and costs that were actually incurred for your project (NOT the budgeted costs). For unit costs and flat-rates, you can charge the amounts calculated as explained in the Grant Agreement (see art 6 and Annex 2 and 2a).
The costs will be reimbursed at the funding rate fixed in the Grant Agreement. This rate depends on the type of action which applies to the topic (see section 2).
Grants may NOT produce a profit (i.e. surplus of revenues + EU grant over costs). Forprofit organisations must declare their revenues and, if there is a profit, we will deduct it from the final grant amount (see art 22.3).
Moreover, please be aware that the final grant amount may be reduced in case of noncompliance with the Grant Agreement (e.g. improper implementation, breach of obligations, etc).
Budget categories and cost eligibility rules
The budget categories and cost eligibility rules are fixed in the Grant Agreement (Data Sheet, point 3 and art 6).
Budget categories for this call:
17

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026
− A. Personnel costs − A.1 Employees, A.2 Natural persons under direct contract, A.3 Seconded persons − A.4 SME owners and natural person beneficiaries
− B. Subcontracting costs − C. Purchase costs
− C.1 Travel and subsistence − C.2 Equipment − C.3 Other goods, works and services − D. Other cost categories − D.2 Internally invoiced goods and services E. Indirect costs
Specific cost eligibility conditions for this call: − personnel costs: − average personnel costs (unit cost according to usual cost accounting practices)14: Yes − SME owner/natural person unit cost15: Yes − travel and subsistence unit costs16: No (only actual costs) − equipment costs: − depreciation − other cost categories: − costs for financial support to third parties: not allowed − internally invoiced goods and services (unit cost according to usual cost accounting practices)17: Yes − indirect cost flat-rate: 7% of the eligible direct costs (categories A-D, except volunteers costs and exempted specific cost categories, if any). − VAT: non-deductible/non-refundable VAT is eligible (but please note that since 2013 VAT paid by beneficiaries that are public bodies acting as public authority is NOT eligible) − other: − in-kind contributions for free are allowed, but cost-neutral, i.e. they cannot be declared as cost − kick-off meeting: costs for kick-off meeting organised by the granting authority are eligible (travel costs for maximum 2 persons, return ticket to
14 Decision of 29 June 2021 authorising the use of unit costs based on usual cost accounting practices for actions under the Digital Europe Programme.
15 Commission Decision of 20 October 2020 authorising the use of unit costs for the personnel costs of the owners of small and medium-sized enterprises and beneficiaries that are natural persons not receiving a salary for the work carried out by themselves under an action or work programme (C(2020)7115).
16 Commission Decision of 12 January 2021 authorising the use of unit costs for travel, accommodation and subsistence costs under an action or work programme under the 2021-2027 multi-annual financial framework (C(2021)35).
17 Decision of 29 June 2021 authorising the use of unit costs based on usual cost accounting practices for actions under the Digital Europe Programme.
18

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026
Brussels and accommodation for one night) only if the meeting takes place after the project starting date set out in the Grant Agreement; the starting date can be changed through an amendment, if needed − project websites: communication costs for presenting the project on the participants’ websites or social media accounts are eligible; costs for separate project websites are not eligible − other ineligible costs: No.
Reporting and payment arrangements
The reporting and payment arrangements are fixed in the Grant Agreement (Data Sheet, point 4 and art 21 and 22).
After grant signature, you will normally receive a prefinancing to start working on the project (float of normally 80% of the maximum grant amount; exceptionally less or no prefinancing). The prefinancing will be paid 30 days from entry into force/10 days before starting date/financial guarantee (if required) – whichever is the latest.
There will be one or more interim payments (with cost reporting through the use of resources report).
Payment of the balance: At the end of the project, we will calculate your final grant amount. If the total of earlier payments is higher than the final grant amount, we will ask you (your coordinator) to pay back the difference (recovery).
All payments will be made to the coordinator.
Please be aware that payments will be automatically lowered if you or one of your consortium members has outstanding debts towards the EU (granting authority or other EU bodies). Such debts will be offset by us — in line with the conditions set out in the Grant Agreement (see art 22).
Please also note that you are responsible for keeping records on all the work done and the costs declared.
Prefinancing guarantees
If a prefinancing guarantee is required, it will be fixed in the Grant Agreement (Data Sheet, point 4). The amount will be set during grant preparation and it will normally be equal or lower than the prefinancing for your grant.
The guarantee should be in euro and issued by an approved bank/financial institution established in an EU Member State. If you are established in a non-EU country and would like to provide a guarantee from a bank/financial institution in your country, please contact us (this may be exceptionally accepted, if it offers equivalent security).
Amounts blocked in bank accounts will NOT be accepted as financial guarantees.
Prefinancing guarantees are normally requested from the coordinator, for the consortium. They must be provided during grant preparation, in time to make the prefinancing (scanned copy via Portal AND original by post).
If agreed with us, the bank guarantee may be replaced by a guarantee from a third party.
The guarantee will be released at the end of the grant, in accordance with the conditions laid down in the Grant Agreement (art 23).
Certificates
19

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026
Depending on the type of action, size of grant amount and type of beneficiaries, you may be requested to submit different certificates. The types, schedules and thresholds for each certificate are fixed in the Grant Agreement (Data Sheet, point 4 and art 24). Liability regime for recoveries The liability regime for recoveries will be fixed in the Grant Agreement (Data Sheet, point 4.4 and art 22). For beneficiaries, it is one of the following:
− limited joint and several liability with individual ceilings — each beneficiary up
to their maximum grant amount
− unconditional joint and several liability — each beneficiary up to the maximum
grant amount for the action or
− individual financial responsibility — each beneficiary only for their own debts.
In addition, the granting authority may require joint and several liability of affiliated entities (with their beneficiary). Provisions concerning the project implementation Security rules: see Model Grant Agreement (art 13 and Annex 5) Ethics rules: see Model Grant Agreement (art 14 and Annex 5) IPR rules: see Model Grant Agreement (art 16 and Annex 5):
− background and list of background: Yes − protection of results: Yes − exploitation of results: Yes − rights of use on results: Yes − access to results for policy purposes: Yes − access to results in case of a public emergency: Yes − access rights to ensure continuity and interoperability obligations: Yes − Communication, dissemination and visibility of funding: see Model Grant
Agreement (art 17 and Annex 5):
− communication and dissemination plan: Yes − dissemination of results: Yes
additional dissemination obligations: No
− additional communication activities: Yes − special logo: No
20

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026
Specific rules for carrying out the action: see Model Grant Agreement (art 18 and Annex 5):
− specific rules for PAC Grants for Procurement: No
− specific rules for Grants for Financial Support: No
− specific rules for blending operations: No
Other specificities
Consortium agreement: Yes
Non-compliance and breach of contract
The Grant Agreement (chapter 5) provides for the measures we may take in case of breach of contract (and other non-compliance issues).
For more information, see AGA — Annotated Grant Agreement.
11. How to submit an application
All proposals must be submitted directly online via the Funding & Tenders Portal Electronic Submission System. Paper applications are NOT accepted.
Submission is a 2-step process:
a) create a user account and register your organisation
To use the Submission System (the only way to apply), all participants need to create an EU Login user account.
Once you have an EULogin account, you can register your organisation in the Participant Register. When your registration is finalised, you will receive a 9-digit participant identification code (PIC).
b) submit the proposal
Access the Electronic Submission System via the Topic page in the Calls for proposals section (or, for calls sent by invitation to submit a proposal, through the link provided in the invitation letter).
Submit your proposal in 3 parts, as follows:
− Part A includes administrative information about the applicant organisations (future coordinator, beneficiaries, affiliated entities and associated partners) and the summarised budget for the proposal. Fill it in directly online
− Part B (description of the action) covers the technical content of the proposal. Download the mandatory word template from the Submission System, fill it in and upload it as a PDF file
− Annexes (see section 5). Upload them as PDF file (single or multiple depending on the slots). Excel upload is sometimes possible, depending on the file type.
The proposal must keep to the page limits (see section 5); excess pages will be disregarded.
Documents must be uploaded to the right category in the Submission System, otherwise the proposal may be considered incomplete and thus inadmissible.
21

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026
The proposal must be submitted before the call deadline (see section 4). After this deadline, the system is closed and proposals can no longer be submitted. Once the proposal is submitted, you will receive a confirmation e-mail (with date and time of your application). If you do not receive this confirmation e-mail, it means your proposal has NOT been submitted. If you believe this is due to a fault in the Submission System, you should immediately file a complaint via the IT Helpdesk webform, explaining the circumstances and attaching a copy of the proposal (and, if possible, screenshots to show what happened). Details on processes and procedures are described in the Online Manual. The Online Manual also contains the links to FAQs and detailed instructions regarding the Portal Electronic Exchange System. 12. Help As far as possible, please try to find the answers you need yourself, in this and the other documentation (we have limited resources for handling direct enquiries):
− Online Manual − Topic Q&A on the Topic page (for call-specific questions in open calls; not
applicable for actions by invitation)
− Portal FAQ (for general questions).
Please also consult the Topic page regularly, since we will use it to publish call updates. (For invitations, we will contact you directly in case of a call update). Contact For individual questions on the Portal Submission System, please contact the IT Helpdesk. Non-IT related questions should be sent to the following email address: https://europa.eu/european-union/contact/write-to-us_en Please indicate clearly the reference of the call and topic to which your question relates (see cover page).
22

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026
13. Important
IMPORTANT
• Don’t wait until the end — Complete your application sufficiently in advance of the deadline to avoid any last minute technical problems. Problems due to last minute submissions (e.g. congestion, etc) will be entirely at your risk. Call deadlines can NOT be extended.
• Consult the Portal Topic page regularly. We will use it to publish updates and additional information on the call (call and topic updates).
• Funding & Tenders Portal Electronic Exchange System — By submitting the application, all participants accept to use the electronic exchange system in accordance with the Portal Terms & Conditions.
• Registration — Before submitting the application, all beneficiaries, affiliated entities and associated partners must be registered in the Participant Register. The participant identification code (PIC) (one per participant) is mandatory for the Application Form.
• Consortium roles — When setting up your consortium, you should think of organisations that help you reach objectives and solve problems.
The roles should be attributed according to the level of participation in the project. Main participants should participate as beneficiaries or affiliated entities; other entities can participate as associated partners, subcontractors, third parties giving in-kind contributions. Associated partners and third parties giving in-kind contributions should bear their own costs (they will not become formal recipients of EU funding). Subcontracting should normally constitute a limited part and must be performed by third parties (not by one of the beneficiaries/affiliated entities). Subcontracting going beyond 30% of the total eligible costs must be justified in the application.
• Coordinator — In multi-beneficiary grants, the beneficiaries participate as consortium (group of beneficiaries). They will have to choose a coordinator, who will take care of the project management and coordination and will represent the consortium towards the granting authority. In mono-beneficiary grants, the single beneficiary will automatically be coordinator.
• Affiliated entities — Applicants may participate with affiliated entities (i.e. entities linked to a beneficiary which participate in the action with similar rights and obligations as the beneficiaries, but do not sign the grant and therefore do not become beneficiaries themselves). They will get a part of the grant money and must therefore comply with all the call conditions and be validated (just like beneficiaries); but they do not count towards the minimum eligibility criteria for consortium composition (if any). If affiliated entities participate in your project, please do not forget to provide documents demonstrating their affiliation link to your organisation as part of your application.
• Associated partners — Applicants may participate with associated partners (i.e. partner organisations which participate in the action but without the right to get grant money). They participate without funding and therefore do not need to be validated.
• Consortium agreement — For practical and legal reasons it is recommended to set up internal arrangements that allow you to deal with exceptional or unforeseen circumstances (in all cases, even if not mandatory under the Grant Agreement). The consortium agreement also gives you the possibility to redistribute the grant money according to your own consortium-internal principles and parameters (for instance, one beneficiary can reattribute its grant money to another beneficiary). The consortium agreement thus allows you to customise the EU grant to the needs inside your consortium and can also help to protect you in case of disputes.
23

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026
• Balanced project budget — Grant applications must ensure a balanced project budget and sufficient other resources to implement the project successfully (e.g. own contributions, income generated by the action, financial contributions from third parties, etc). You may be requested to lower your estimated costs, if they are ineligible (including excessive).
• Completed/ongoing projects — Proposals for projects that have already been completed will be rejected; proposals for projects that have already started will be assessed on a case-by-case basis (in this case, no costs can be reimbursed for activities that took place before the project starting date/proposal submission).
• No-profit rule — Grants may NOT give a profit (i.e. surplus of revenues + EU grant over costs). This will be checked by us at the end of the project.
• No cumulation of funding/no double funding — It is strictly prohibited to cumulate funding from the EU budget (except under ‘EU Synergies actions’). Outside such Synergies actions, any given action may receive only ONE grant from the EU budget and cost items may under NO circumstances be declared under two EU grants; projects must be designed as different actions, clearly delineated and separated for each grant (without overlaps).
• Combination with EU operating grants — Combination with EU operating grants is possible, if the project remains outside the operating grant work programme and you make sure that cost items are clearly separated in your accounting and NOT declared twice (see AGA — Annotated Grant Agreement, art 6.2.E).
• Multiple proposals — Applicants may submit more than one proposal for different projects under the same call (and be awarded funding for them). Organisations may participate in several proposals. BUT: if there are several proposals for very similar projects, only one application will be accepted and evaluated; the applicants will be asked to withdraw the others (or they will be rejected).
• Resubmission — Proposals may be changed and re-submitted until the deadline for submission.
• Rejection — By submitting the application, all applicants accept the call conditions set out in this this Call document (and the documents it refers to). Proposals that do not comply with all the call conditions will be rejected. This applies also to applicants: All applicants need to fulfil the criteria; if any one of them doesn’t, they must be replaced or the entire proposal will be rejected.
• Cancellation — There may be circumstances which may require the cancellation of the call. In this case, you will be informed via a call or topic update. Please note that cancellations are without entitlement to compensation.
• Language — You can submit your proposal in any official EU language (project abstract/summary should however always be in English). For reasons of efficiency, we strongly advise you to use English for the entire application. If you need the call documentation in another official EU language, please submit a request within 10 days after call publication (for the contact information, see section 12).
24

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026 • Transparency — In accordance with Article 38 of the EU Financial Regulation,
information about EU grants awarded is published each year on the Europa website. This includes:
− beneficiary names − beneficiary addresses − the purpose for which the grant was awarded − the maximum amount awarded.
The publication can exceptionally be waived (on reasoned and duly substantiated request), if there is a risk that the disclosure could jeopardise your rights and freedoms under the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights or harm your commercial interests. • Data protection — The submission of a proposal under this call involves the collection, use and processing of personal data. This data will be processed in accordance with the applicable legal framework. It will be processed solely for the purpose of evaluating your proposal, subsequent management of your grant and, if needed, programme monitoring, evaluation and communication. Details are explained in the Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement.
25

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026
Annex 1
Digital Europe types of action
The Digital Europe Programme uses the following actions to implement grants:
Simple Grants
Description: Simple Grants (SIMPLE) are a flexible type of action used by a large variety of topics and can cover most activities. The consortium will mostly use personnel costs to implement action tasks, activities with third parties (subcontracting, financial support, purchase) are possible but should be limited.
Funding rate: 50%
Payment model: Prefinancing – (x) interim payment(s) – final payment
SME Support Actions
Description: SME Support Actions (SME) are a type of action primarily consisting of activities directly aiming to support SMEs involved in building up and the deployment of the digital capacities. This type of action can also be used if SMEs need to be in the consortium and make investments to access the digital capacities.
Funding rate: 50% except for SMEs where a rate of 75% applies
Payment model: Prefinancing – (x) interim payment(s) – final payment
Coordination and Support Actions (CSAs)
Description: Coordination and Support Actions (CSAs) are a small type of action (a typical amount of 1-2 Mio) with the primary goal to support EU policies. Activities can include coordination between different actors for accompanying measures such as standardisation, dissemination, awareness-raising and communication, networking, coordination or support services, policy dialogues and mutual learning exercises and studies, including design studies for new infrastructure and may also include complementary activities of strategic planning, networking and coordination between programmes in different countries.
Funding rate: 100%
Payment model: Prefinancing – (x) interim payment(s) – final payment
Grants for Procurement
Description: Grants for Procurement (GP) are a special type of action where the main goal of the action (and thus the majority of the costs) consist of buying goods or services and/or subcontracting tasks. Contrary to the PAC Grants for Procurement (see below) there are no specific procurement rules (i.e. usual rules for purchase apply), nor is there a limit to ‘contracting authorities/entities’. Personnel costs should be limited in this type of action; they are in general used to manage the grant, coordination between the beneficiaries, preparation of the procurements.
Funding rate: 50%
Payment model: Prefinancing - second prefinancing (to provide the necessary cashflow to finance the procurements) – payment of the balance
PAC Grants for Procurement
26

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026
Description: PAC Grants for Procurement (PACGP) are a specific type of action for procurement in grant agreements by ‘contracting authorities/entities’ as defined in the EU Public Procurement Directives (Directives 2014/24/EU , 2014/25/EU and 2009/81/EC) aiming at innovative digital goods and services (i.e. novel technologies on the way to commercialisation but not yet broadly available).
Funding rate: 50%
Payment model: Prefinancing - second prefinancing (to provide the necessary cashflow to finance the procurements) – payment of the balance
Grants for Financial Support
Description: Grants for Financial Support (GfS) have a particular focus on cascading grants. The majority of the grant will be distributed via financial support to third parties with special provisions in the grant agreement, maximum amounts to third parties, multiple pre-financing and reporting obligations.
Annex 5 of the model grant agreements foresees specific rules for this type of action regarding conflict of interest, the principles of transparency, non-discrimination and sound financial management as well as the selection procedure and criteria.
In order to assure the co-financing obligation in the programme, the support to third parties should only cover 50% of third party costs.
Funding rate: 100% for the consortium, co-financing of 50% by the supported third party
Payment model: Prefinancing - second prefinancing (to provide the necessary cashflow to finance sub-grants) – payment of the balance
Lump Sum Grants
Description: Lump Sum Grants (LS) reimburse a general lump sum for the entire project and the consortium as a whole. The lump sum is fixed ex-ante (at the latest at grant signature). on the basis of a methodology defined by the granting authority (either on the basis of a detailed project budget or other pre-defined parameters). The lump sum will cover all the beneficiaries’ direct and indirect costs for the project. The beneficiaries do not need to report actual costs, they just need to claim the lump sum once the work is done. If the action is not properly implemented only part of the lump sum will be paid.
Funding rate: 100%/50%/50% and 75% (for SMEs)
Payment model: Prefinancing – (x) interim payment(s)– final payment
Framework Partnerships (FPAs) and Specific Grants (SGAs)
FPAs
Description: FPAs establish a long-term cooperation mechanism between the granting authority and the beneficiaries of grants. The FPA specifies the common objectives (action plan) and the procedure for awarding specific grants. The specific grants are awarded via identified beneficiary actions (with or without competition).
Funding rate: no funding for FPA
SGAs
27

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026
Description: The SGAs are linked to an FPA and implement the action plan (or part of it). They are awarded via an invitation to submit a proposal (identified beneficiary action). The consortium composition should in principle match (meaning that only entities that are part of the FPA can participate in an SGA), but otherwise the implementation is rather flexible. FPAs and SGAs can have different coordinators ; other partners of the FPA are free to participate in an SGA or not. There is no limit to the amount of SGAs signed under one FPA. Funding rate: 50% Payment model: Prefinancing – (x) interim payment(s) – final payment
28

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026
Annex 2
Eligibility restrictions under Articles 12(5) and (6) and 18(4) of the Digital Europe Regulation
Security restrictions Article 12(5) and (6)
If indicated in the Digital Europe Work Programme, and if justified for security reasons, topics can exclude the participation of legal entities established in a third country or DEP associated country, or established in the EU territory but controlled by a third country or third country legal entities (including DEP associated countries)18.
This restriction is applicable for SO1 (High Performance Computing), SO2 (Artificial Intelligence) and SO3 (Cybersecurity), but at different levels.
− In the case of SO3, the provision is implemented in the strictest way. When
activated, only entities established in the EU AND controlled from the EU will be able to participate; entities from associated countries (which are normally eligible) can NOT participate — unless otherwise provided in the Work Programme.
− In SO1 and SO2, entities established in associated countries and entities
controlled from non-EU countries may participate, if they comply with the conditions set out in the Work Programme (usually:
− for the associated countries: be formally associated to Digital Europe
Programme and receive a positive assessment by the Commission on the replies to their associated country security questionnaire
− for the participants: submission of a guarantee demonstrating that they
have taken measures to ensure that their participation does not contravene security or EU strategic autonomy interests).
EEA countries (and participants from EEA countries) are exempted from these restrictions (and additional requirements) because EEA countries benefit from a status equivalent to the Member States.
In order to determine the ownership and control status, participants19 will be required to fill in and submit an ownership control declaration*as part of the proposal (and later on be requested to submit supporting documents) (see Guidance on participation in EU restricted calls with ownership and control restrictions*).
In addition, where a guarantee is required, the participants will also have to fill in the guarantee template*, approved by the competent authorities of their country of establishment, and submit it to the granting authority which will assess its validity.
The activation of these restrictions will also make a number of specific provisions in the Grant Agreement applicable, such as country restrictions for eligible costs, country restrictions for subcontracting, and special rules for implementation, exploitation of results and transfers and exclusive licensing of results.
Thus:
18 See Article 12(5) and (6) of the Digital Europe Regulation 2021/694. 19 Beneficiaries and affiliated entities, associated partners and subcontractors — except for entities that are
validated as public bodies by the Central Validation Service.
29

Call: DIGITAL-2026-SUPPORT-10 — Programme Support Actions
EU Grants: Call document (DEP): V1.0 – 01.04.2026
− participation in any capacity (as beneficiary, affiliated entity, associated partner, subcontractor or recipient of financial support to third parties) is also limited to entities established in and controlled from eligible countries
− project activities (included subcontracted work) must take place in eligible countries
− the Grant Agreement provides for specific IPR restrictions. Strategic autonomy restrictions Article 18(4) If indicated in the Digital Europe Work Programme, calls can limit the participation to entities established in the EU, and/or entities established in third countries associated to the programme for EU strategic autonomy reasons20. The activation of these restrictions will make a number of specific provisions in the Grant Agreement applicable, such as country restrictions for eligible costs, country restrictions for subcontracting, and special rules for implementation, exploitation of results and transfers and exclusive licensing of results.
For more information, see Guidance on participation in EU restricted calls with ownership and control restrictions*.
20 See Article 18(4) of the Digital Europe Regulation 2021/694. 30

