INSTRUMENTO: Research actions in the form of a technological challenge implemented via lump sum grants
CODIGO: EDF-2026-LS-RA-CHALLENGE-DIGIT-AISAP-STEP
FONTE: EU Funding & Tenders Portal / European Defence Fund (EDF)
DATA_DOWNLOAD: 2026-05-05

NOME OFICIAL: AI-based tactical situational awareness using swarms of small robots and drones – participation in a  technological challenge"
CALL: EDF-2026-LS-RA-CHALLENGE
CALL TITLE: Research actions in the form of a technological challenge implemented via lump sum grants
PROGRAMA: EDF - European Defence Fund (EDF)
TIPO ACAO: 

DOTACAO:
  2026: EUR 30.000.000

PRAZOS:
ABERTURA: 2026-02-11
DEADLINE: 2026-09-29
MODELO_PRAZO: single-stage

DESCRICAO E IMPACTO ESPERADO:
Scope:

Assisting soldiers with robots and drones that can provide accurate tactical situational awareness by using AI becomes essential for soldier protection. This call topic aims to follow on and complement previous activities in the field of hidden threat detection and explore solutions involving various combinations of intelligent robots, drones and sensing technologies for advanced detection and recognition of threats, in view of their avoidance or neutralisation.

These solutions should be tested under realistic scenarios in a comparable and objective manner to reach up to Technical Readiness Level (TRL) 6. For that purpose, each consortium supported through this call topic will benefit from a common testing environment set up as part of a technological challenge and will have to participate in the experiment campaigns organised with this objective.

Beyond defence technologies, this topic also contributes to the STEP objectives as defined in the STEP Regulation in the target investment area of deep and digital technologies. 

Targeted types of activities: Generating knowledge, not excluding upstream and downstream activities eligible for research actions.

Indicative budget: EUR 23 000 000 for this topic under the EDF-2026-LS-RA-CHALLENGE call.

Indicative number of proposals to be funded: Several proposals may be funded for this topic.

Range of the financial contribution of the EU per proposal: The requested funding cannot exceed EUR 4 600 000.

CONDICOES / ELEGIBILIDADE / CRITERIOS:
">Conditions1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout

described in section 5 of the call document.

Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System.

2. Eligible Countries

described in section 6 of the call document.

3. Other Eligible Conditions

described in section 6 of the call document.

4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion

described in section 7 of the call document.

5a. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes

described section 8 of the call document and the Online Manual.

5b. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds

described in section 9 of the call document.

5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement

described in section 4 of the call document.

6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants

described in section 10 of the call document.

Call document and annexes: 

Call document

Application form templates

Standard application form (EDF) — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System

Detailed budget table (EDF LS RA)

Participant information (EDF)

List of infrastructure, facilities, assets and resources (EDF) 

Actual indirect cost methodology declaration (EDF)&#xa0;

Ownership control declaration&#xa0;

Ownership control guarantee

PRS declaration (EDF)&#xa0;

Model Grant Agreements (MGA)

EDF, ASAP and EDIRPA Lump Sum MGA&#xa0;

Additional documents: 

EDF Annual Work Programme

EDF Regulation 2021/697

EDF Programme Security Instruction (PSI)

Guidelines on FSTP implementation - WP2026

EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509

Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment 

EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement 

Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual 

Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions 

Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement

INFORMACAO DE SUPORTE:
For help related to this call, please contact DEFIS-EDF-PROPOSALS@ec.europa.eu

Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – Submission of proposals.

IT Helpdesk – Contact the IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc.

Online Manual – Step-by-step online guide through the Portal processes from proposal preparation and evaluation to reporting on your ongoing project. Valid for all 2021-2027 programmes.

FONTE OFICIAL: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/opportunities/topic-details/EDF-2026-LS-RA-CHALLENGE-DIGIT-AISAP-STEP