Title: Support for the functioning of SEAPs, including  for the purpose of establishing, managing and maintaining defence industrial readiness pools
Call: EDF-EDIP-P-2026-2027-FNLC-SA
Call title: Continuous call for proposals for supporting actions under the Programme
Programme: EDF - European Defence Fund (EDF)
Division: European Defence Fund (EDF)
Deadlines: 1791849600, 1802736000, 1822089600
Budget 2026: EUR 4000000
Budget 2027: EUR 6000000

Description:
Expected Impact: Supported SEAPs are expected to rent office space, recruit personnel and start and uphold operations for a duration of at least one year. Objective: This call aims to provide support for functioning of established SEAPs, including for the purpose of establishing, managing and maintaining defence industrial readiness pools. Scope: Proposals shall aim to support established SEAPs in their initial operations for a duration of at least one year. Budget The Commission is considering a total budget of EUR 10 000 000 for the call for proposals. The maximum EU contribution per funded project will not exceed EUR 2 000 00 0 allowing several proposals to be funded. Depending on the number and quality of received proposals and the requested Union financial contributions, the Commission may decide to reallocate budget between calls

Conditions:
"> Conditions 1. Admissibility conditions: Proposal page limit and layout described in section 5 of the call document (available shortly) Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System. 2. Eligible countries described in section 6 of the call document . 3. Other eligibility conditions described in section 6 of the call document . 4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion described in section 7 of the call document . 5a. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes described section 8 of the call document and the Online Manual . 5b. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds described in section 9 of the call document . 5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement described in section 4 of the call document . 6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants described in section 10 of the call document . Call document and annexes: Call document (available shortly) Application form templates Available shortly Model Grant Agreements (MGA) Additional documents: EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509 Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement &#xa0; Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual &#xa0; Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions &#xa0; Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement

Support info:
For help related to this call, please contact DEFIS-EDIP-PROPOSALS@ec.europa.eu Useful resources and documents , such as guidance and video tutorials on call contents and proposal preparation Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – Submission of proposals . IT Helpdesk – Contact the IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc. Online Manual – Step-by-step online guide through the Portal processes from proposal preparation and evaluation to reporting on your ongoing project. Valid for all 2021-2027 programmes.