EP-LINC-SUBV-2026-CONF-INT-03 - Organisation of high-quality master, post-graduate or bachelor courses offering conference interpreter training in Ukrainian, Montenegrin, and Albanian (2026-2027)

Topic Identifier: EP-LINC-SUBV-2026-CONF-INT-03
Call Identifier: EP-LINC-SUBV-2026-CONF-INT
Call Title: FINANCIAL SUPPORT FOR TRAINING IN CONFERENCE INTERPRETING
Framework Programme: EP - European Parliament (EP)
Programme Division: Grants in the Area of Interpretation
Type of Action / MGA: 

BUDGET

DEADLINES
  - : 
  - : 

DESCRIPTION
Expected Outcome: To ensure the availability of a sufficient number of qualified conference interpreters having Ukrainian, Montenegrin or Albanian as "A" language, Directorate-General for Logistics and Interpretation for Conferences supports and assists in strengthening training programmes by providing professional and financial assistance. The aim of these activities is to help produce new generations of qualified conference interpreters having Ukrainian, Montenegrin or Albanian as "A" language who may, subsequently, be recruited by the EU institutions, and in particular by the European Parliament, as officials or as accredited conference interpreting agents. Objective: As a provider of interpretation services in the European Parliament, and increasingly to other EU institutions and bodies, the mission of the Directorate-General for Logistics and Interpretation for Conferences is to ensure that a sufficient number of qualified conference interpreters having Ukrainian, Montenegrin, or Albanian as "A" language are available to enable the EU institutions and bodies to function properly in a context of linguistic diversity including at regular events, all over the world, where wide language cover is required. Under the principle of subsidiarity, Member States have the obligation to provide the necessary training. The European Parliament identifies the language combinations and skills that best match its needs, and assists universities in training high quality conference interpreters within these priority combinations. The programme contributes to this mission by supporting the following actions in the field of interpretation: The promotion of quality and linguistic diversity in the teaching of conference interpreting in the official languages of the EU, of the candidate countries and of the countries which are the main political partners of the Union; The establishment of postgraduate centres of excellence and/or research; Cooperation among postgraduate courses from different European, candidate and third countries offering relevant language combinations; Regional cooperation among universities; and Integration of modern information and communication technologies in the training of conference interpreters. Scope: Higher Education Institutions, Universities, university institutes, consortia and associations of universities or institutes - which offer or coordinate master, postgraduate courses or bachelor courses with conference interpreting components registered in Ukraine, Montenegro, or Albania.

CONDITIONS / ELIGIBILITY
"> Conditions 1. Admissibility conditions: Proposal page limit and layout described in section 4 and 5 of the call document . Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System. 2. Eligible countries described in section 5 of the call document . 3. Other eligibility conditions described in section 6 of the call document . 4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion described in section 6 and 7 of the call document . - Submission and evaluation processes described section 4, 8 and 9 of the call document and the Online Manual . - Award criteria, scoring and thresholds described in section 8 and 9 of the call document . - Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement described in section 3 of the call document . 6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants described in section 10 to 15 of the call document . Call documents: Call document Standard application form - This document is just for information. The application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System. Please scroll down and click on "Start Submission" to start filling in the application form. Annex III - Detailed budget table - This document is just for information. The Budget table to this call is available in the Submission System. Please scroll down and click on "Start Submission" to start filling in the application form. Additional documents: European Parliament's DG LINC Grants - Work Programme 2026 EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509 Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment Grant Agreement - Draft template Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual Annex II General Conditions Annex III Detailed Budget Annex IV A FinaI Implementation report Annex IV B Financial statement and invoices Annex V Declaration on Honour Staff costs hourly rate calculation Financial identification form Guide financial identification form Guide for applicants Model time sheet Questions and Answers form previous calls Grants awarded 2025 Privacy Statement Language priorities LINK TO WEBINAR 20/03/2026 - Info Session about this Call for proposals for Universities Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement

SUPPORT INFO
For help related to EP-LINC calls, please contact linc.grants@europarl.europa.eu For help related to EP-COMM calls, please contact dgcomm-subvention@europarl.europa.eu Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – Submission of proposals . IT Helpdesk – Contact the IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc. Online Manual – Step-by-step online guide through the Portal processes from proposal preparation and evaluation to reporting on your ongoing project. Valid for all 2021-2027 programmes.

SEP TEMPLATE / SUBMISSION
To access the Electronic Submission Service, please click on the submission-button next to the type of action and the type of model grant agreement that corresponds to your proposal. You will then be asked to confirm your choice, as it cannot be changed in the submission system. Upon confirmation, you will be linked to the correct entry point. To access existing draft proposals for this topic, please login to the Funding & Tenders Portal and select the My Proposals page of the My Area section.
