Ref. Ares(2024)1938478 - 13/03/2024
EU4Health Programme (EU4H)
Call for proposals for a Framework Partnership Agreement for operating grants
(2025-2026) to non-governmental organisations:
Financial contribution to the functioning of health non-governmental bodies implementing one or more specific objectives of Regulation
(EU)2021/522 (EU4H-2024-OG-FPA)
Version 1.0 14 March 2024

Call: EU4H-2024-OG-FPA — Call for proposals for a Framework Partnership Agreement for Operating Grants (2025 – 2026): Financial contribution to the functioning of health non-governmental bodies implementing one or more specific objectives of Regulation (EU)2021/522
EUROPEAN HEALTH AND DIGITAL EXECUTIVE AGENCY (HaDEA)
HaDEA.A – Health and Food HaDEA.A.1.001 –EU4Health I
CALL FOR PROPOSALS
TABLE OF CONTENTS 0. Introduction .............................................................................................................................. 4 1. Background............................................................................................................................... 6 2. Objectives — Themes and priorities — Activities that can be funded — Expected impact ..................... 6
EU4H-2024-OG-FPA — Call for proposals for a Framework Partnership Agreement for operating grants (2025-2026) to non-governmental organisations ........................................................... 6
Objectives (linked to general and specific objectives of the programme) .......................................... 6 Strand (scope) ......................................................................................................................... 6 Activities that can be funded (scope)........................................................................................... 6 Expected impact (including EU added value, expected outputs and results)...................................... 6 3. Available budget ........................................................................................................................ 7 4. Timetable and deadlines ............................................................................................................. 8 5. Admissibility and documents ....................................................................................................... 9 6. Eligibility................................................................................................................................... 9 Eligible participants (eligible countries).......................................................................................10 Consortium composition ...........................................................................................................11 Eligible activities......................................................................................................................11 Geographic location (target countries)........................................................................................12 Duration .................................................................................................................................12 Project budget.........................................................................................................................12 7. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion...........................................................................14 Financial capacity ....................................................................................................................14 Operational capacity ................................................................................................................15 Exclusion ................................................................................................................................15 8. Evaluation and award procedure .................................................................................................16 9. Award criteria...........................................................................................................................17 10. How to submit an application....................................................................................................23 11. Help ......................................................................................................................................24 12. Important ..............................................................................................................................25
2

Call: EU4H-2024-OG-FPA — Call for proposals for a Framework Partnership Agreement for Operating Grants (2025 – 2026): Financial contribution to the functioning of health non-governmental bodies implementing one or more specific objectives of Regulation (EU)2021/522
0. Introduction
This is a call for proposals for EU framework partnership agreement for operating grants (2025-2026) in the field of health under the EU4Health Programme (EU4H).
The regulatory framework for this EU Funding Programme is set out in:
− Regulation 2018/1046 (EU Financial Regulation)
− the basic act (EU4H Programme Regulation 2021/5221).
The call is launched in accordance with the 2024 Work Programme2 and will be managed by the European Health and Digital Executive Agency, (HaDEA) (‘Agency’).
Operating grants provide general financial support to organisations whose statutory activities serve the strategic objectives of EU policies (mainly non-profit organisations, voluntary associations, foundations, NGOs or similar). They do not support a specific project (like action grants), but the annual operating budget of the organisation (or part of it). Operating grants are always mono-beneficiary grants, supporting the work programme of activities of only one organisation. They follow the same rules for the grant agreements as action grants, but do not differentiate between direct and indirect costs. Receiving an operating grant may however have an impact on the possibility to receive the indirect costs flat-rate in EU action grants (see AGA — Annotated Grant Agreement, art 6.2.E).
Framework partnerships (FPAs) are long-term cooperation instruments that serve as umbrella for regular or recurrent grants in the same field or area and under a common action plan (or work programme of activities). They are a prerequisite for being able to apply for these grants, but don’t create any legitimate expectations or entitlement to get them. FPA beneficiaries are normally identified on the basis of a standard evaluation and award procedure and then invited to submit their proposals for grants (closed calls; addressed directly to the framework partners). Grant agreements (SGAs) can only be signed if the FPA has been signed, and before the end date of the FPA.
The call covers the following topics:
− EU4H-2024-OG-FPA — Call for proposals for a Framework Partnership Agreement for operating grants (2025-2026) to non-governmental organisations: financial contribution to the functioning of health non-governmental bodies implementing one or more specific objectives of Regulation (EU) 2021/522 (DP-g-24-33.2)
We invite you to read the call documentation carefully, and in particular this Call Document, the Model Grant Agreement, the EU Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual and the EU Grants AGA — Annotated Grant Agreement.
These documents provide clarifications and answers to questions you may have when preparing your application:
− the Call Document outlines the:
1 Regulation (EU) 2021/522 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 March 2021 establishing a Programme for the Union’s action in the field of health (‘EU4Health Programme’) for the period 20212027 (OJ L107 of 26 March 2021).
2 Commission Implementing Decision C(2023)8524 final of 5 December 2023 concerning the adoption of the work programme for 2024 and the financing decision for the implementation of the EU4Health programme.
3

Call: EU4H-2024-OG-FPA — Call for proposals for a Framework Partnership Agreement for Operating Grants (2025 – 2026): Financial contribution to the functioning of health non-governmental bodies implementing one or more specific objectives of Regulation (EU)2021/522
− background, objectives, scope, activities that can be funded and the expected results (sections 1 and 2)
− timetable and available budget (sections 3 and 4)
− admissibility and eligibility conditions (including mandatory documents; sections 5 and 6)
− criteria for financial and operational capacity and exclusion (section 7)
− evaluation and award procedure (section 8)
− award criteria (section 9)
− legal and financial set-up of the Grant Agreements (section 10)
− how to submit an application (section 11)
− the Online Manual outlines the:
− procedures to register and submit proposals online via the EU Funding & Tenders Portal (‘Portal’)
− recommendations for the preparation of the application
− the AGA — Annotated Grant Agreement contains:
− detailed annotations on all the provisions in the Grant Agreement you will have to sign in order to obtain the grant (including cost eligibility, payment schedule, accessory obligations, etc).
You are also encouraged to visit the DG SANTE website to consult the list of projects funded previously.
1. Background
NGOs play a major role among others in providing aid at Union, national and local levels. In the field of health, and especially public health, they provide services directly to patients and individuals being in some cases in the first line of action also during emergencies. NGOs are also essential in bridging the gap between institutions and patients and facilitating communication at national and Union level. These organisations are not-for-profit and therefore necessarily rely on funding from different sources, for instance private donations, national or international contributions, however it is important they address funding sustainability of their operations.
The Commission considers it important that there is continuity in the work carried out by the health NGOs in addressing current health challenges including the COVID-19 pandemic and its consequences, and intends to award operating grants under this work programme to eligible NGOs, and to launch a Framework Partnership Agreement (‘FPA’) for a duration of two years (2025-2026).
NGOs’ expertise and contribution are expected to be of added value in relation to NCDs, in particular on cancer, addressing important health determinants including the harmful exposure to second-hand smoke and aerosol, ageing society, vulnerable groups and rare diseases. Poor nutrition, physical inactivity, obesity, tobacco use and harmful use of alcohol (which are risk factors common to other chronic diseases, such as cardiovascular diseases) may also require attention.
4

Call: EU4H-2024-OG-FPA — Call for proposals for a Framework Partnership Agreement for Operating Grants (2025 – 2026): Financial contribution to the functioning of health non-governmental bodies implementing one or more specific objectives of Regulation (EU)2021/522
The demographic changes, in particular the ageing society, challenge the sustainability of health systems, and disorders such as dementia and age-related diseases and disabilities may need to be addressed. Patients and health systems need to have access to sustainable, efficient, equitable, and affordable high-quality medicinal products, including in the cross-border context, to fully benefit from those medicinal products on the basis of transparent, consistent, and patient-oriented medical information.
The views of the patients with complex or rare diseases and conditions that require highly specialised treatment, and concentrated knowledge and resources, need to be heard and their access to diagnosis and high-quality healthcare improved. Furthermore, there is a need to protect people in vulnerable situations, including those suffering from mental illness and those living with or most affected by communicable or non-communicable diseases and chronic diseases. There is also a need to promote activities, which address and prevent the collateral impact of health crises on people belonging to such vulnerable groups and actions that improve mental health.
The operating grants linked to a specified timeframe and specific outputs or results are intended to provide support to health NGOs that pursue one or more of the general objectives (Article 3, (a) to (d), of Regulation (EU) 2021/522) and through the specific objectives defined in Article 4, points (a) to (j), of Regulation (EU) 2021/522.
2. Objectives — Themes and priorities — Activities that can be funded — Expected impact
Objectives (linked to general and specific objectives of the programme)
The objective is to launch a Framework Partnership Agreement with eligible NGOs in view of potentially providing funding for their functioning during 2025 and 2026.
Activities that can be funded (scope)
Through their core operational activities, the health NGOs will deliver on increased health literacy and health promotion, capacity building and networking; and contribute to the optimisation of healthcare activities and practices by providing feedback from patients and facilitating communication with patients.
Expected impact (including EU added value, expected outputs and results)
The beneficiaries are expected to further demonstrate in their proposals the Union added value of their activities and commit to deliver concrete results such as: online materials, webpages, manuals and tools on case studies promoting health in schools, factsheets and relevant literature, materials for teachers on health literacy, and assistance and promotion of twinning with other schools in the Union capacitybuilding and training activities to reduce the impact of risk factors for noncommunicable diseases; new approaches to promote healthy and sustainable diets; expert guidance and peer-to-peer connections; and collaborate in shared areas of activity.
Some of the beneficiaries’ activities are expected to contribute to the implementation of non-legislative policy initiatives and/or the implementation of relevant Union health
5

Call: EU4H-2024-OG-FPA — Call for proposals for a Framework Partnership Agreement for Operating Grants (2025 – 2026): Financial contribution to the functioning of health non-governmental bodies implementing one or more specific objectives of Regulation (EU)2021/522
legislation. Such activities will support the implementation of the revised Council Recommendation on Smoke-free environments and key actions in this context.
The beneficiaries will facilitate the exchange of knowledge, capacity building related to their expertise and should cooperate with other civil society organisations and international organisations (e.g., the WHO and other organisations).
Specific action-level indicators for reporting purposes
Applicants must include data on the following specific action-level indicators in their regular reporting activities, and must be prepared to include additional specific actionlevel indicators where needed:
 Number of staff in NGOs participating to the actions supported that contribute to the achievement of the EU4Health objective (per specific objective)
 Number of activities/actions supported that contribute to the achievement of the EU4Health objective (per specific objective)
o Number of outputs (including access and download of the online materials) delivered relating to awareness raising activities on various health aspects such as health literacy and health promotion
 (by type e.g. factsheets and relevant literature, materials for teachers on health literacy, assistance and promotion of twinning with other European schools, etc.)
 Number of outputs (including access and download of the online materials) delivered relating to communication and dissemination activities (by type e.g., online materials produced, webpages published, manuals and tools produced on case studies, etc.)
 Number of outputs delivered relating to capacity building and training activities (by type e.g., capacity-building activities and training courses organized to reduce the impact of risk factors for non-communicable diseases, etc.)
o Number of people participating in capacity building/training activities
o Improved level of knowledge after the activity
o Satisfaction rate of the participants
 Number of people/entities benefitting of the actions supported that contribute to the achievement of the EU4Health objectives (per specific objective)
 Number of people in vulnerable groups actions benefiting of actions supported that contribute to the achievement of the EU4Health objective (per specific objective)
The applicant should provide in the proposal the indicators’ metadata (e.g., description, baseline, target, milestones) in line with the Better Regulation Tool 43, page 366.
Additional specific indicators are needed when the objectives and activities of the proposals go beyond and deliver more than the requirements of the call text.
For more information on EU health policies, see Health and Food Safety.
6

Call: EU4H-2024-OG-FPA — Call for proposals for a Framework Partnership Agreement for Operating Grants (2025 – 2026): Financial contribution to the functioning of health non-governmental bodies implementing one or more specific objectives of Regulation (EU)2021/522
3. Available budget The indicative budget for 2025 and 2026 is not yet available. 4. Timetable and deadlines

Timetable and deadlines (indicative) FPA Call opening: Deadline for submission:
Evaluation: Information on evaluation results: FPA signature:

14 March 2024 13 June 2024 – 17:00:00 CET
(Brussels) June - July 2024
End July 2024 By October 2024

5. Admissibility and documents
Proposals must be submitted before the call deadline (see timetable section 4).
Proposals must be submitted electronically via the Funding & Tenders Portal Electronic Submission System (accessible via the Topic page in the Search Funding & Tenders section. Paper submissions are NOT possible.
Proposals (including annexes and supporting documents) must be submitted using the forms provided inside the Submission System ( NOT the documents available on the Topic page — they are only for information).
Proposals must be complete and contain all the requested information and all required annexes and supporting documents:
− Application Form Part A — contains administrative information about the participants (future coordinator, beneficiaries and affiliated entities) and the summarised budget for the project (to be filled in directly online)
− Application Form Part B — contains the technical description of the project (to be downloaded from the Portal Submission System, completed and then assembled and re-uploaded)
− mandatory annexes and supporting documents (templates available to be downloaded from the Portal Submission System, completed, assembled and re-uploaded):
− CVs (standard) of core project team, CVs can be made available following a free format. CVs can be merged and uploaded in a unique pdf;
− list of previous projects (key projects for the last 4 years) (template available in Part B)
− Statutes of the NGO;

7

Call: EU4H-2024-OG-FPA — Call for proposals for a Framework Partnership Agreement for Operating Grants (2025 – 2026): Financial contribution to the functioning of health non-governmental bodies implementing one or more specific objectives of Regulation (EU)2021/522
− Extract from the register of associations or the relevant registration authority except where national law provides that registration is not obligatory;
− Declaration of absence of conflict of interest from industry (free format);
− Annual financial report of the last two years; − Annual activity reports of the last two years; − Minutes of the last general assemblies of the last two years; − List of members of the NGO; − Self-assessment of the effectiveness of previous actions carried out by
the NGO playing an effective role at Union level (free format); − Justification provided by the applicant organisation (free format) of the
financial support need for the implementation of the one or more of the specific objectives of Regulation (EU) 2021/522 as per the content of the proposal submitted. At proposal submission, you will have to confirm that you have the mandate to act for all applicants. Moreover, you will have to confirm that the information in the application is correct and complete and that the participants comply with the conditions for receiving EU funding (especially eligibility, financial and operational capacity, exclusion, etc.). Before signing the framework partnership, each beneficiary and affiliated entity will have to confirm this again by signing a declaration of honour (DoH). Proposals without full support will be rejected. Your application must be readable, accessible and printable.
Proposals are limited to maximum 70 pages (Part B). Evaluators will not consider any additional pages.
You may be asked at a later stage for further documents (for legal entity validation, financial capacity check, bank account validation, etc).
For more information about the submission process (including IT aspects), consult the Online Manual.
6. Eligibility
Applications will only be considered eligible if their content corresponds wholly (or at least in part) to the topic description for which they are submitted.
Eligible participants (eligible countries)
In order to be eligible, the applicants (beneficiaries and affiliated entities) must: − be legal entities (public or private bodies) − be established in one of the eligible countries, i.e.: − EU Member States (including overseas countries and territories (OCTs)) − eligible non-EU countries:
− listed EEA countries and countries associated to the EU4Health
Programme (list of participating countries) − other eligibility conditions:
Applicants are required to comply with the criteria set out in Article 13(1)-(4) and (8), of Regulation (EU) 2021/522, including the specific criteria detailed below, and
8

Call: EU4H-2024-OG-FPA — Call for proposals for a Framework Partnership Agreement for Operating Grants (2025 – 2026): Financial contribution to the functioning of health non-governmental bodies implementing one or more specific objectives of Regulation (EU)2021/522

relevant criteria set out in the Financial Regulation.
Additionally, applicants, NGOs active in the public health area, have to comply as follows:

Criterion

Subcriterion

Conditions to fulfil

Non-for-profit n/a

The

applicant

must

be

organised and

operated

for

collective, public

or social benefit;

any revenues that

exceed expenses

must

be

committed to the

organisation's

purpose,

not

taken by private

parties

Independence

of

industry,

commercial and

business

Financial independence

The

applicant

must,

at

submission stage,

demonstrate that

is

financially

independent by:

a)

submitting

proof that not

more than 30% of

the core funding3

of the applicant

organisation is

received

from

private

sector

donors; or b) if

the above core

funding threshold

is exceeded, but

is below 50%,

demonstrating

that

private

sector donors do

not

exercise

influence on the

decision

and

regular activities

of the applicant

organisation.

Legal

The

independence must

applicant provide

Proof
− Statutes − Annual financial reports of the
last two years

a) Annual financial reports of the last two years

b) Supporting documents

such as minutes and

attendee lists of recurrent

meetings, brochures and

other

communication

(including exchanges with

the Commission), annual

activity reports and a

mandatory declaration on

honour;

internal

procedures/policies/mitiga

ting

measures

to

safeguard independence

− Statutes

3 Core funding means financing required for the basic structure of an organisation, including salaries of fulltime staff, facilities, equipment, communications and direct expenses of its day-to-day work.

9

Call: EU4H-2024-OG-FPA — Call for proposals for a Framework Partnership Agreement for Operating Grants (2025 – 2026): Financial contribution to the functioning of health non-governmental bodies implementing one or more specific objectives of Regulation (EU)2021/522

Absence conflict interest

Active in the

public health

area and pursue

at least one of

the

specific

n/a

objectives of

Regulation (EU)

2021/522

Being active at

Union level in at

least half of the

Member States with a balanced

n/a

geographical

coverage of the

Union.

Play an effective role at Union n/a level
Financial support necessary for

proof of the

absence of direct

or indirect holding

of

decision-

making powers,

de facto or in law,

by another legal

entity or natural

person

The

applicant

must prove the

of of

absence

of

conflict of interest

of board of

management or

similar governing

body

The

applicant

must demonstrate

being active in

the public health

area

and

pursuing at least

one of the specific

objectives laid

down in Article 4,

of Regulation (EU)

2021/522

The

applicant

must

provide

proof of being

active at Union

level and, through

its

statutory

member

organisations, in

at least half of the

Member States, in

a geographically

balanced

The

applicant

must

provide

proof

of

effectiveness at

Union level

The

applicant

must justify why

the

financial

− Extract from the register of associations or the relevant registration authority except where national law provided that registration is not obligatory
− Minutes of the general assemblies of the last two years
− Declaration on honour (free format)
− Statutes − Extract from the register of
associations or the relevant registration authority except where national law provided that registration is not obligatory (or similar) − Annual activity report from the last 2 years − Supporting documents such as minutes and attendee lists of recurrent meetings, brochures and other communication (including exchanges with the Commission)
− Statutes − List of members of the NGO − Annual activity reports from
the last two years
− Self-assessment of the effectiveness of previous actions (free format)
− Justification provided by the applicant organisation (free format)

10

Call: EU4H-2024-OG-FPA — Call for proposals for a Framework Partnership Agreement for Operating Grants (2025 – 2026): Financial contribution to the functioning of health non-governmental bodies implementing one or more specific objectives of Regulation (EU)2021/522

the implementation of one or more n/a of the specific objectives of Regulation (EU)
2021/522

support of the

Union is needed

for

the

achievement of

one or several of

the

specific

objectives

of

Regulation (EU)

2021/522.

Beneficiaries and affiliated entities must register in the Participant Register — before submitting the proposal — and will have to be validated by the Central Validation Service (REA Validation). For the validation, they will be requested to upload documents showing legal status and origin.
Other entities may participate in other consortium roles, such as associated partners, subcontractors, third parties giving in-kind contributions, etc (see section 13).
Specific cases
Natural persons — Natural persons are NOT eligible (with the exception of selfemployed persons, i.e. sole traders, where the company does not have legal personality separate from that of the natural person).
Entities without legal personality — Entities which do not have legal personality under their national law may exceptionally participate, provided that their representatives have the capacity to undertake legal obligations on their behalf, and offer guarantees for the protection of the EU financial interests equivalent to that offered by legal persons4.
EU bodies — EU bodies (with the exception of the European Commission Joint Research Centre) can NOT be part of the consortium.
Associations and interest groupings — Entities composed of members may participate as ‘sole beneficiaries’ or ‘beneficiaries without legal personality’5. Please note that if the action will be implemented by the members, they should also participate (either as beneficiaries or as affiliated entities, otherwise their costs will NOT be eligible).
European Reference Networks (ERNs) — These cover networks between healthcare providers and centres of expertise in the Member States to reinforce healthcare cooperation, in particular in the area of rare diseases, in line with the objectives set out in Article 12 of Directive 2011/24.
Countries currently negotiating association agreements — Beneficiaries from countries with ongoing negotiations for participation in the programme (see list of participating countries above) may participate in the call and can sign grants if the negotiations are concluded before grant signature and if the association covers the call (i.e. is retroactive and covers both the part of the programme and the year when the call was launched).
EU restrictive measures — Special rules apply for certain entities (e.g. entities subject to EU restrictive measures under Article 29 of the Treaty on the European Union
4 See Article 197(2)(c) EU Financial Regulation 2018/1046. 5 For the definitions, see Articles 187(2) and 197(2)(c) EU Financial Regulation 2018/1046.
11

Call: EU4H-2024-OG-FPA — Call for proposals for a Framework Partnership Agreement for Operating Grants (2025 – 2026): Financial contribution to the functioning of health non-governmental bodies implementing one or more specific objectives of Regulation (EU)2021/522
(TEU) and Article 215 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU (TFEU)6). Such entities are not eligible to participate in any capacity, including as beneficiaries, affiliated entities, associated partners, subcontractors or recipients of financial support to third parties (if any). Following the Council Implementing Decision (EU) 2022/2506, as of 16th December 2022, no legal commitments (including the grant agreement itself as well as subcontracts, purchase contracts, financial support to third parties etc.) can be signed with Hungarian public interest trusts established under Hungarian Act IX of 2021 or any entity they maintain.
For more information, see Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment.
Consortium composition
Only applications by single applicants are allowed (single beneficiaries).
Eligible activities
Eligible activities are the ones set out in section 2 above.
Proposals must comply with EU policy interests and priorities (such as environment, social, security, industrial and trade policy, etc).
Financial support to third parties is not allowed.
Geographic location (target countries)
Proposals must relate to activities taking place in the eligible countries (see above).
Duration
The Framework Partnership Agreement with eligible NGOs will potentially provide funding for their functioning during 2025 and 2026.
7. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion
Financial capacity
Applicants must have stable and sufficient resources to successfully implement the projects and contribute their share. Organisations participating in several projects must have sufficient capacity to implement all these projects.
The financial capacity check will be carried out on the basis of the documents you will be requested to upload in the Participant Register during grant preparation (e.g. profit and loss account and balance sheet, business plan, audit report produced by an approved external auditor, certifying the accounts for the last closed financial year, etc). The analysis will be based on neutral financial indicators, but will also take into account other aspects, such as dependency on EU funding and deficit and revenue in previous years.
In addition for a beneficiary requesting an EU-contribution of ≥ EUR 100 000 EUR an audit report produced by an approved external auditor, where it is available, and always in cases where a statutory audit is required by Union or national law, certifying the accounts for up to the last two available financial years. In all other cases, the
6 Please note that the EU Official Journal contains the official list and, in case of conflict, its content prevails over that of the EU Sanctions Map.
12

Call: EU4H-2024-OG-FPA — Call for proposals for a Framework Partnership Agreement for Operating Grants (2025 – 2026): Financial contribution to the functioning of health non-governmental bodies implementing one or more specific objectives of Regulation (EU)2021/522
applicant shall provide a self-declaration signed by its authorised representative certifying the validity of its accounts.
The check will normally be done for all beneficiaries, except:
− public bodies (entities established as public body under national law, including
local, regional or national authorities) or international organisations
− if the individual requested grant amount is not more than EUR 60 000.
If needed, it may also be done for affiliated entities.
If we consider that your financial capacity is not satisfactory, we may require:
− further information − an enhanced financial responsibility regime, i.e. joint and several responsibility
for all beneficiaries or joint and several liability of affiliated entities (see below, section 10)
− prefinancing paid in instalments − (one or more) prefinancing guarantees (see below, section 10)
or
− propose no prefinancing − request that you are replaced or, if needed, reject the entire proposal.
For framework partnerships, the financial capacity check will be done both at FPA and SGA-level.
For more information, see Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment.
Operational capacity
Applicants must have the know-how, qualifications and resources to successfully implement the projects and contribute their share (including sufficient experience in projects of comparable size and nature).
This capacity will be assessed together with the ‘Quality’ award criterion, on the basis of the competence and experience of the applicants and their project teams, including operational resources (human, technical and other) or, exceptionally, the measures proposed to obtain it by the time the task implementation starts.
If the evaluation of the award criterion is positive, the applicants are considered to have sufficient operational capacity.
Applicants will have to show their capacity via the following information:
− general profiles (qualifications and experiences) of the staff responsible for
managing and implementing the project
− description of the consortium participants − applicants’ activity reports of last two years
− list of previous projects (key projects for the last 4 years; template available in
Part B).
13

Call: EU4H-2024-OG-FPA — Call for proposals for a Framework Partnership Agreement for Operating Grants (2025 – 2026): Financial contribution to the functioning of health non-governmental bodies implementing one or more specific objectives of Regulation (EU)2021/522
Additional supporting documents may be requested, if needed to confirm the operational capacity of any applicant.
Public bodies, Member State organisations and international organisations are exempted from the operational capacity check.
For framework partnerships, the operational capacity check will be done generally at FPA-level and then again for each grant application in the grants calls).
Exclusion
Applicants which are subject to an EU exclusion decision or in one of the following exclusion situations that bar them from receiving EU funding can NOT participate7:
− bankruptcy, winding up, affairs administered by the courts, arrangement with creditors, suspended business activities or other similar procedures (including procedures for persons with unlimited liability for the applicant’s debts)
− in breach of social security or tax obligations (including if done by persons with unlimited liability for the applicant’s debts)
− guilty of grave professional misconduct8 (including if done by persons having powers of representation, decision-making or control, beneficial owners or persons who are essential for the award/implementation of the framework partnership)
− committed fraud, corruption, links to a criminal organisation, money laundering, terrorism-related crimes (including terrorism financing), child labour or human trafficking (including if done by persons having powers of representation, decision-making or control, beneficial owners or persons who are essential for the award/implementation of the framework partnership)
− shown significant deficiencies in complying with main obligations under an EU procurement contract, grant agreement, prize, expert contract, or similar (including if done by persons having powers of representation, decisionmaking or control, beneficial owners or persons who are essential for the award/implementation of the framework partnership)
− guilty of irregularities within the meaning of Article 1(2) of EU Regulation 2988/95 (including if done by persons having powers of representation, decision-making or control, beneficial owners or persons who are essential for the award/implementation of the framework partnership)
− created under a different jurisdiction with the intent to circumvent fiscal, social or other legal obligations in the country of origin or created another entity with this purpose (including if done by persons having powers of representation, decision-making or control, beneficial owners or persons who are essential for the award/implementation of the framework partnership).
Applicants will also be rejected if it turns out that9:
− during the award procedure they misrepresented information required as a condition for participating or failed to supply that information
7 See Articles 136 and 141 of EU Financial Regulation 2018/1046. 8 Professional misconduct includes: violation of ethical standards of the profession, wrongful conduct
with impact on professional credibility, false declarations/misrepresentation of information, participation in a cartel or other agreement distorting competition, violation of IPR, attempting to influence decision-making processes or obtain confidential information from public authorities to gain advantage. 9 See Article 141 EU Financial Regulation 2018/1046.
14

Call: EU4H-2024-OG-FPA — Call for proposals for a Framework Partnership Agreement for Operating Grants (2025 – 2026): Financial contribution to the functioning of health non-governmental bodies implementing one or more specific objectives of Regulation (EU)2021/522
− they were previously involved in the preparation of the call and this entails a distortion of competition that cannot be remedied otherwise (conflict of interest).
For framework partnerships, exclusion will be checked before FPA signature and then again before signature of each grant).
8. Evaluation and award procedure
The proposals will have to follow the standard submission and evaluation procedure (one-stage submission + one-step evaluation)
An evaluation committee (potentially assisted by independent outside experts) will assess all applications. Proposals will first be checked for formal requirements (admissibility, and eligibility, see sections 5 and 6). Proposals found admissible and eligible will be evaluated (for each topic) against the operational capacity and award criteria (see sections 7 and 9) and then ranked according to their scores.
For proposals with the same score (within a topic or budget envelope) a priority order will be determined according to the following approach:
Successively for every group of ex aequo proposals, starting with the highest scored group, and continuing in descending order:
1) Projects focusing on a theme that is not otherwise covered by higher ranked projects will be considered to have the highest priority.
2) The ex aequo proposals within the same topic will be prioritised according to the scores they have been awarded for the award criterion ‘Relevance’. When these scores are equal, priority will be based on their scores for the criterion ‘Impact’. When these scores are equal, priority will be based on their scores for the criterion ‘Quality’.
3) If this does not allow to determine the priority, a further prioritisation can be done by considering the overall project portfolio and the creation of positive synergies between projects, or other factors related to the objectives of the call. These factors will be documented in the panel report.
All proposals will be informed about the evaluation result (evaluation result letter). Successful proposals will be invited for grant preparation; the other ones will be put on the reserve list or rejected.
No commitment for funding — Invitation to grant preparation does NOT constitute a formal commitment for funding. We will still need to make various legal checks before grant award: legal entity validation, financial capacity, exclusion check, etc.
Grant preparation will involve a dialogue in order to fine-tune technical or financial aspects of the project and may require extra information from your side. It may also include adjustments to the proposal to address recommendations of the evaluation committee or other concerns. Compliance will be a pre-condition for signing the framework partnership.
If you believe that the evaluation procedure was flawed, you can submit a complaint (following the deadlines and procedures set out in the evaluation result letter). Please note that notifications which have not been opened within 10 days after sending will be considered to have been accessed and that deadlines will be counted from opening/access (see also Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions). Please also be aware that for complaints submitted electronically, there may be character limitations.
15

Call: EU4H-2024-OG-FPA — Call for proposals for a Framework Partnership Agreement for Operating Grants (2025 – 2026): Financial contribution to the functioning of health non-governmental bodies implementing one or more specific objectives of Regulation (EU)2021/522

9. Award criteria
The award criteria for this call are as follows:
1. Relevance: clarity and consistency of project, objectives and planning; extent to which they match the themes and priorities and objectives of the call; contribution to the EU strategic and legislative context; European/transnational dimension; impact/interest for a number of countries (EU or eligible non-EU countries); possibility to use the results in other countries; potential to develop mutual trust/cross-border cooperation (30 points)
2. Quality:
− Project design and implementation: technical quality; logical links between the identified problems, needs and solutions proposed (logical frame concept); methodology for implementing the project (concept and methodology, management, procedures, timetable, risks and risk management, monitoring and evaluation); feasibility of the project within the proposed time frame; cost effectiveness (sufficient/appropriate budget for proper implementation; best value for money) (30 points)
− Project team and cooperation arrangements: quality of the consortium and project teams; appropriate procedures and problemsolving mechanisms for cooperating within the project teams and consortium (30 points)
3. Impact: ambition and expected long-term impact of results on target groups/general public; appropriate dissemination strategy for ensuring sustainability and long-term impact; sustainability of results after EU funding ends (10 points).

Award criteria
Relevance Quality — Project design and implementation Quality — Project team and cooperation arrangements Impact Overall (pass) scores

Minimum pass score

Maximum score

21

30

21

30

21

30

7

10

70

100

Maximum points: 100 points. Individual thresholds per criterion: 21/30, 21/30, 21/30 and 7/10 points. Overall threshold: 70 points. Proposals that pass the individual thresholds AND the overall threshold will be considered for funding — within the limits of the available budget (i.e. up to the budget ceiling). Other proposals will be rejected. 10. How to submit an application All proposals must be submitted directly online via the Funding & Tenders Portal
16

Call: EU4H-2024-OG-FPA — Call for proposals for a Framework Partnership Agreement for Operating Grants (2025 – 2026): Financial contribution to the functioning of health non-governmental bodies implementing one or more specific objectives of Regulation (EU)2021/522
Electronic Submission System. Paper applications are NOT accepted.
Submission is a 2-step process:
a) create a user account and register your organisation
To use the Submission System (the only way to apply), all participants need to create an EU Login user account.
Once you have an EULogin account, you can register your organisation in the Participant Register. When your registration is finalised, you will receive a 9-digit participant identification code (PIC).
b) submit the proposal
Access the Electronic Submission System via the Topic page in the Search Funding & Tenders section (or, for calls sent by invitation to submit a proposal, through the link provided in the invitation letter).
Submit your proposal in 3 parts, as follows:
− Part A includes administrative information about the applicant organisations (future coordinator, beneficiaries, affiliated entities and associated partners) and the summarised budget for the proposal. Fill it in directly online
− Part B (description of the action) covers the technical content of the proposal. Download the mandatory word template from the Submission System, fill it in and upload it as a PDF file
− Annexes (see section 5). Upload them as PDF file (single or multiple depending on the slots). Excel upload is sometimes possible, depending on the file type.
The proposal must keep to the page limits (see section 5); excess pages will be disregarded.
Documents must be uploaded to the right category in the Submission System otherwise the proposal might be considered incomplete and thus inadmissible.
The proposal must be submitted before the call deadline (see section 4). After this deadline, the system is closed and proposals can no longer be submitted.
Once the proposal is submitted, you will receive a confirmation e-mail (with date and time of your application). If you do not receive this confirmation e-mail, it means your proposal has NOT been submitted. If you believe this is due to a fault in the Submission System, you should immediately file a complaint via the IT Helpdesk webform, explaining the circumstances and attaching a copy of the proposal (and, if possible, screenshots to show what happened).
Details on processes and procedures are described in the Online Manual. The Online Manual also contains the links to FAQs and detailed instructions regarding the Portal Electronic Exchange System.
11. Help
As far as possible, please try to find the answers you need yourself, in this and the other documentation (we have limited resources for handling direct enquiries):
− Online Manual − Portal FAQ (for general questions).
17

Call: EU4H-2024-OG-FPA — Call for proposals for a Framework Partnership Agreement for Operating Grants (2025 – 2026): Financial contribution to the functioning of health non-governmental bodies implementing one or more specific objectives of Regulation (EU)2021/522
Please also consult the Topic page regularly, since we will use it to publish call updates. (For invitations, we will contact you directly in case of a call update). Contact For individual questions on the Portal Submission System, please contact the IT Helpdesk. Non-IT related questions should be sent to the following email address up to 12 days before the deadline: HADEA-HP-CALLS@ec.europa.eu. Please indicate clearly the reference of the call and topic to which your question relates (see cover page).
18

Call: EU4H-2024-OG-FPA — Call for proposals for a Framework Partnership Agreement for Operating Grants (2025 – 2026): Financial contribution to the functioning of health non-governmental bodies implementing one or more specific objectives of Regulation (EU)2021/522
12. Important
IMPORTANT • Don’t wait until the end — Complete your application sufficiently in advance of
the deadline to avoid any last minute technical problems. Problems due to last minute submissions (e.g. congestion, etc) will be entirely at your risk. Call deadlines can NOT be extended. • Consult the Portal Topic page regularly. We will use it to publish updates and additional information on the call (call and topic updates).
• Funding & Tenders Portal Electronic Exchange System — By submitting the application, all participants accept to use the electronic exchange system in accordance with the Portal Terms & Conditions.
• Registration — Before submitting the application, all beneficiaries, affiliated entities and associated partners must be registered in the Participant Register. The participant identification code (PIC) (one per participant) is mandatory for the Application Form.
• Coordinator — In multi-beneficiary grants, the beneficiaries participate as consortium (group of beneficiaries). They will have to choose a coordinator, who will take care of the project management and coordination and will represent the consortium towards the granting authority. In mono-beneficiary grants, the single beneficiary will automatically be coordinator.
• Affiliated entities — Applicants may participate with affiliated entities (i.e. entities linked to a beneficiary which participate in the action with similar rights and obligations as the beneficiaries, but do not sign the grant and therefore do not become beneficiaries themselves). They will get a part of the grant money and must therefore comply with all the call conditions and be validated (just like beneficiaries); but they do not count towards the minimum eligibility criteria for consortium composition (if any).
• Associated partners — Applicants may participate with associated partners (i.e. partner organisations which participate in the action but without the right to get grant money). They participate without funding and therefore do not need to be validated.
• Consortium agreement — For practical and legal reasons it is recommended to set up internal arrangements that allow you to deal with exceptional or unforeseen circumstances (in all cases, even if not mandatory under the Grant Agreement). The consortium agreement also gives you the possibility to redistribute the grant money according to your own consortium-internal principles and parameters (for instance, one beneficiary can reattribute its grant money to another beneficiary). The consortium agreement thus allows you to customise the EU grant to the needs inside your consortium and can also help to protect you in case of disputes.
19

Call: EU4H-2024-OG-FPA — Call for proposals for a Framework Partnership Agreement for Operating Grants (2025 – 2026): Financial contribution to the functioning of health non-governmental bodies implementing one or more specific objectives of Regulation (EU)2021/522
• Completed/ongoing projects — Proposals for projects that have already been completed will be rejected; proposals for projects that have already started will be assessed on a case-by-case basis (in this case, no costs can be reimbursed for activities that took place before the project starting date/proposal submission).
• Multiple proposals — Applicants may submit more than one proposal for different projects under the same call (and be awarded funding for them). Organisations may participate in several proposals. BUT: if there are several proposals for very similar projects, only one application will be accepted and evaluated; the applicants will be asked to withdraw the others (or they will be rejected).
• Resubmission — Proposals may be changed and re-submitted until the deadline for submission.
• Rejection — By submitting the application, all applicants accept the call conditions set out in this this Call Document (and the documents it refers to). Proposals that do not comply with all the call conditions will be rejected. This applies also to applicants: All applicants need to fulfil the criteria; if any one of them doesn’t, they must be replaced or the entire proposal will be rejected.
• Cancellation — There may be circumstances which may require the cancellation of the call. In this case, you will be informed via a call or topic update. Please note that cancellations are without entitlement to compensation.
• Language — You can submit your proposal in any official EU language (project abstract/summary should however always be in English). For reasons of efficiency, we strongly advise you to use English for the entire application. If you need the call documentation in another official EU language, please submit a request within 10 days after call publication (for the contact information, see section 12).
20

Call: EU4H-2024-OG-FPA — Call for proposals for a Framework Partnership Agreement for Operating Grants (2025 – 2026): Financial contribution to the functioning of health non-governmental bodies implementing one or more specific objectives of Regulation (EU)2021/522
• Transparency — In accordance with Article 38 of the EU Financial Regulation, 4. information about EU grants awarded is published each year on the Europa website.
This includes: − beneficiary names − beneficiary addresses − the purpose for which the grant was awarded − the maximum amount awarded.
The publication can exceptionally be waived (on reasoned and duly substantiated request), if there is a risk that the disclosure could jeopardise your rights and freedoms under the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights or harm your commercial interests. • Data protection — The submission of a proposal under this call involves the collection, use and processing of personal data. This data will be processed in accordance with the applicable legal framework. It will be processed solely for the purpose of evaluating your proposal, subsequent management of your grant and, if needed, programme monitoring, evaluation and communication. Details are explained in the Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement.
Electronically signed on 13/03/2024 16:35 (UTC+01) in accordance with Article 11 of Commission Decisi2o1n (EU) 2021/2121

