EUAF-2026-TRAI-04 - Comparative law studies and periodical publications

Topic Identifier: EUAF-2026-TRAI-04
Call Identifier: EUAF-2026-TRAI
Call Title: Training, Conferences, Staff Exchanges and Studies
Framework Programme: EUAF - Union Anti-fraud Programme (EUAF)
Programme Division: EUAF-1-1
Type of Action / MGA: 

BUDGET

DEADLINES
  - : 
  - : 
  - : 
  (queue deadline: 2026-05-31)

DESCRIPTION
Expected Outcome: Expected results: (i) conduct of high-profile research, including in the area of comparative law; (ii) original high-quality articles published in academic and scientific publications and (iii) raised awareness among stakeholders, including the judiciary and other branches of the legal profession, of the continued need to protect the financial interests of the EU. Scope: Conduct of relevant, high-profile research on topics related to the protection of the financial interests of the EU against fraud, corruption or any other irregularities, including in the area of comparative law. Dissemination of relevant information through periodical publications.

CONDITIONS / ELIGIBILITY
"> Conditions 1. Admissibility conditions: Proposal page limit and layout described in section 5 of the call document . Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System. 2. Eligible countries described in section 6 of the call document . 3. Other eligibility conditions described in section 6 of the call document . 4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion described in section 7 of the call document . 5a. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes described section 8 of the call document and the Online Manual . 5b. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds described in section 9 of the call document . 5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement described in section 4 of the call document . 6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants described in section 10 of the call document . Call document and annexes: Call document Application form templates Standard application form (EUAF) — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System Detailed budget table (EUAF TRAI) Draft Agenda-Outline (EUAF TRAI) Model Grant Agreements (MGA) EUAF MGA Additional documents: EUAF Annual Work Programme EUAF Regulation 2021/785 EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509 Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement

SUPPORT INFO
For help related to this call, please contact OLAF-ANTI-FRAUD-TRAINING@ec.europa.eu Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – Submission of proposals . IT Helpdesk – Contact the IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc. Online Manual – Step-by-step online guide through the Portal processes from proposal preparation and evaluation to reporting on your ongoing project. Valid for all 2021-2027 programmes.

SEP TEMPLATE / SUBMISSION
To access the Electronic Submission Service, please click on the submission-button next to the type of action and the type of model grant agreement that corresponds to your proposal. You will then be asked to confirm your choice, as it cannot be changed in the submission system. Upon confirmation, you will be linked to the correct entry point. To access existing draft proposals for this topic, please login to the Funding & Tenders Portal and select the My Proposals page of the My Area section.

TAGS: 