AVISO: EUAF-2026-TRAI-02
TITULO: Conferences, workshops and seminars
CALL ID: EUAF-2026-TRAI
FRAMEWORK: {'id': 43251842, 'abbreviation': 'EUAF', 'description': 'Union Anti-fraud Programme (EUAF)'}
DEADLINE: 
BUDGET (EUR): 
TYPES OF ACTION: {'status': {'id': 31094502, 'abbreviation': 'Open', 'description': 'Open'}, 'types': [{'typeOfAction': 'EUAF-PJG EUAF Project Grants', 'typeOfMGA': [{'id': 43250003, 'abbreviation': 'EUAF-AG', 'description': 'EUAF Action Grant Budget-Based'}]}], 'plannedOpeningDate': '1773705600000', 'submissionProcedure': {}, 'deadlineDates': ['1778112000000']}
KEYWORDS: 

=== DESCRIPTION ===
Expected Outcome:

Professionals, in particular staff from customs authorities and other law enforcement bodies, are better able to protect the financial interests of the EU through: (i) the acquisition of new skills; (ii) acquisition of knowledge of specialised methodologies and techniques; (iii) an increased awareness of fraud-risk indicators at EU level and (iv) more opportunities to develop and implement anti-fraud strategies at EU level.

Scope:

Organising conferences, workshops and seminars and creating networks and structural platforms between Member States, candidate countries and potential candidates, other third countries, EU institutions and international organisations in order to:

(1) facilitate the exchange of information, experience and best practice, including in anti-fraud and anti-corruption systems and data analysis;

(2) create networks and improve coordination between Member States, candidate countries and potential candidates, other third countries, EU institutions and international organisations;

(3) facilitate multidisciplinary cooperation and awareness-raising between anti-fraud and anti-corruption practitioners (in particular customs authorities and other law enforcement bodies) and academics on protecting the financial interests of the EU, including support for the Associations for European Criminal Law and for the Protection of EU Financial Interests;

(4) raise awareness of this matter among the judiciary and other legal professionals.

=== CONDITIONS ===
">Conditions

1. Admissibility conditions: Proposal page limit and layout

described in section 5 of the call document.

Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System.

2. Eligible countries

described in section 6 of the call document.

3. Other eligibility conditions

described in section 6 of the call document.

4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion

described in section 7 of the call document.

5a. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes

described section 8 of the call document and the Online Manual.

5b. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds

described in section 9 of the call document.

5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement

described in section 4 of the call document.

6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants

described in section 10 of the call document.

Call document and annexes:

 Call document

Application form templates

Standard application form (EUAF) — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System 

Detailed budget table (EUAF TRAI) 

Draft Agenda-Outline (EUAF TRAI) 

Model Grant Agreements (MGA)

EUAF MGA

Additional documents:

 EUAF Annual Work Programme

EUAF Regulation 2021/785 

EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509

Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment 

EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement 

Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual 

Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions 

Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement