Contracting Authority: European Commission
Civil Society, Media, Human Rights and Democracy programmes for Bosnia and Herzegovina 2025-2026
Guidelines for grant applicants
Budget line(s): Civil Society Facility: E.15020101.01 (allocation 2025) Human Rights and Democracy: 14.020211 (2025), (2026)1
Deadline for submission2 of full application: 20/05/2026 at 17:00 (Brussels date and time)
Reference:
EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA (in order to convert to local time click here3)

1 Human Rights and Democracy 2026 pending adoption of the Commission Decision 2 Online submission via PROSPECT is mandatory for this call for proposals (see section 2.2.2). In PROSPECT all dates and
times are expressed in Brussels time. Applicants should note that the IT support is open Monday to Friday from 08:30 to
18:30 Brussels time (except during European Commission public holidays in Belgium as published in the Official Journal).
Applicants should take note of the weekly maintenance hours mentioned in the PROSPECT user manual. 3 An example of a time converter tool available online: http://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/converter.html

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 1 of 33

NOTICE
This is an open call for proposals, where all documents are submitted together: concept note (Annex A.1- Grant application form - Concept note) and full application (Annex A.2 - Grant application form - Full application). In the first instance, only the concept notes will be evaluated. Thereafter, for the lead applicants who have been preselected, the full applications will be evaluated. After the evaluation of the full applications, an eligibility check will be performed for those which have been provisionally selected (including those placed on the reserve list). Eligibility will be checked on the basis of the supporting documents requested by the contracting authority and the signed ‘declaration by the lead applicant’ sent together with the full application.
IMPORTANT
Please note that the awarding of the contract under the Thematic programme Human Rights and Democracy is subject to the availability of funds for the year 2026, which does not modify the basic elements of this call for proposal but may affect the budget initially foreseen. If the funds are not available the contracting authority will limit the award of contracts to the funds available.
Online submission via PROSPECT
To apply to this call for proposals, organisations must register in PADOR and submit their application in PROSPECT (see section 2.2.2 of the guidelines). The aim of PROSPECT is to increase the efficiency of the management of the call for proposals and to offer a better service to civil society organisations through a new panel of functionalities such as the on-line submission and the possibility to follow up online the status of their application.
All organisations may find more information regarding PROSPECT in the user's manual and the elearning videos. You may also contact our technical support team via the online support form in PROSPECT4.

4 If PROSPECT is unavailable, the IT support can also be reached via email: ec-external-relations-applicationsupport@ec.europa.eu.
EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 2 of 33

Table of contents

1. Civil Society, Media, Human Rights and Democracy programmes for Bosnia and Herzegovina

2025-2026

4

1.1. Background............................................................................................................................ 4

1.2. Objectives of the programme and priority issues ................................................................. 4

1.3. Financial allocation provided by the contracting authority ................................................... 4

2. RULES FOR THIS CALL FOR PROPOSALS

5

2.1. Eligibility criteria .................................................................................................................. 5

2.1.1. Eligibility of applicants (i.e. lead applicant and co-applicant(s)) .................................. 6

2.1.2. Associates, contractors, recipients of financial support .................................................. 8

2.1.3. Eligible actions: actions for which an application may be made ..................................... 9

2.1.4. Eligibility of costs and eligibility of results/conditions ................................................ 11

2.1.5. Ethics and values ........................................................................................................... 14

2.2. How to apply and the procedures to follow ........................................................................ 15

2.2.1. Application forms.......................................................................................................... 16

2.2.2. Where and how to send applications ........................................................................................ 18

2.2.3. Deadline for submission of applications ...................................................................... 19

2.2.4. Further information about applications ....................................................................... 20

2.3. Evaluation ........................................................................................................................... 20

2.3.1. STEP 1: ADMINISTRATIVE CHECKS AND CONCEPT NOTE EVALUATION ... 21

2.3.2. STEP 2: EVALUATION OF THE FULL APPLICATION .......................................... 22

2.3.3. STEP 3: VERIFICATION OF ELIGIBILITY OF THE APPLICANTS AND AFFILIATED ENTITY(IES) AND OTHER SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS ..................... 24

2.4. Award decision ................................................................................................................... 24

2.5. Notification of the Contracting Authority’s decision ......................................................... 24

2.6. Signature of the grant contract ............................................................................................ 25

2.7. Indicative timetable ............................................................................................................ 25

2.8. Early detection and exclusion system ................................................................................ 26

3. LIST OF ANNEXES

26

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 3 of 33

1. CIVIL SOCIETY, MEDIA, HUMAN RIGHTS AND DEMOCRACY PROGRAMMES FOR BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA 2025-2026
1.1. BACKGROUND
In the context of EU accession, a vibrant civil society contributes to fulfilling the conditions for EU membership. Civil society plays a very important role in the EU negotiation process to ensure that citizens have sufficient influence on and ownership of the reforms as the EU accession is a whole of society process that cannot be left to the Government and the Parliament only. Civil society organisations (CSOs) advocate for reforms and monitor them. They contribute to greater transparency and accountability. Therefore, the effectiveness of civil society is assessed as part of the political criteria and particularly the “Functioning of Democratic Institutions” along with the role played by the Parliament and the elections in a functioning democratic society.
Civil society and media organisations in Bosnia and Herzegovina play an important role to promote democratic debate, to protect the respect of fundamental rights and equality, as well as to contribute to key sectoral reforms. The engagement of CSOs is essential to ensure strengthened participation of citizens in the decision making process, through effective consultations and civic participation, both at central and local level. In this historical moment for the country, civil society needs even more support to be able to play fully its role.
Civil society plays a crucial role in promoting and protecting human rights globally. They have been instrumental in advocating for the rights of marginalized communities, monitoring government actions, and holding them accountable for their human rights obligations. Civil Society is also at increasing risk of being delegitimised or incapacitated, at least in parts of the country, and the CfP aims to support Civil Society at risk”.The bulk of the action will be implemented by EU Delegations, so as to better respond to local needs, and in line with the human rights and democracy country strategies.
The IPA III Programming framework considers the support to civil society and media as one of the priorities to improve democracy and rule of law. It calls, inter alia for “particular focus (…) to safeguard the freedom of expression and independence of media as pillars of democracy”. Gender is transversal to all IPA III framework priorities, and it has a specific mention in the following below.
The Programme will primarily contribute to Window 1: Rule of law, fundamental rights and democracy, Thematic Priority 5: Fundamental rights (with reference to media freedom of expression and gender) and Thematic Priority 7: Civil Society; Window 2: Good governance, EU acquis alignment, good neighbourly relations and strategic communication, Thematic Priority 1: Good governance - Economic governance; and Window 3: Green agenda and sustainable connectivity, Thematic Priority 1: Environment and climate change.
This call for proposals is financed under both the Civil Society Facility and Media Programme (hereafter CSF) and the Thematic Programme for Human Rights and Democracy (HR&D), in line with the objectives of the respective programmes as outlined below.
Proposals are expected to address issues identified in the latest Country report for Bosnia and Herzegovina5 within the relevant thematic areas.
Proposals submitted by consortia of CSOs, media outlets, associations, or thematic networks, such as umbrella organizations, alliances for EU integration, or joint initiatives focused on democratic governance, human rights, media freedom, or civic participation are particularly welcome.
Civil Society Facility and Media
Under IPA III and for the period 2021-2027, the overall objective of the CSF is to strengthen participatory democracies and the EU approximation and integration process in the enlargement region through an enhanced contribution of civil society and media. The CSF is in line with DG NEAR Guidelines for EU Support to Civil Society in the Enlargement Region 2021-20276 which aim at achieving the following outcomes: (i) a conducive environment for civil society to carry out its activities (ii) strengthened cooperation and partnership between CSOs

5 https://enlargement.ec.europa.eu/bosnia-and-herzegovina-report-2025_en 6 https://enlargement.ec.europa.eu/system/files/2022-10/EU-Guidelines-for-Support-to-Civil-Society-in-the-Enlargement-
region-2021-2027.pdf

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 4 of 33

and public institutions (iii) reinforced CSO capacity and resilience to carry out their activities effectively. The country-specific CSF action document for Bosnia and Herzegovina 2024-20257 envisage to support civil society and media organisations in the policy areas where public consultation is of primary importance in the accession negotiations, where monitoring and reporting of civil society and media organisations is necessary to increase transparency and accountability and where the involvement of civil society and media organisations has been weak or absent while their involvement can bring significant gains.
Specifically, this year’s call for proposal (CfP) under the CSF focuses on the following priority areas of support: Lot 1: Media, Lot 2: Rule of Law, Lot 3: Reconciliation through sport and culture, Lot 4: Civil Society (CSO) Resource Center
Thematic Programme for Human Rights and Democracy
The Thematic Programme for Human Rights and Democracy (hereafter HR&D programme) is designed to support civil society to become an effective force for political reform and defence of human rights. It supports the implementation of the EU Action Plan on Human Rights and Democracy for the period 2025-20278 which identifies five overarching priorities and key actions to ensure that the EU plays a greater role in promoting and defending human rights and democracy throughout its external action: (i) Protecting and empowering individuals (ii) Building resilient, inclusive and democratic societies (iii) Promoting a global system for human rights and democracy (iv) Harnessing the opportunities and addressing challenges of new technologies and (v) Delivering by working together. In the EU accession context, the focus of the HR&D programme is on the role of CSOs with an emphasis on areas linked to the political criteria, including the stability of institutions guaranteeing democracy, the rule of law and human rights.
Specifically, this year’s CfP under the HR&D programme (Lot 5) focuses on three components: (i) protecting and empowering people; (ii) promoting responsive, inclusive, participatory and representative decision making, and (iii) promoting human rights and democracy in the use of digital technologies, including artificial intelligence.

1.2. OBJECTIVES OF THE PROGRAMME AND PRIORITY ISSUES
The global objective of this call for proposals is to strengthen participatory democracy, protection of human rights and the EU approximation process in Bosnia and Herzegovina through an enhanced contribution by civil society and media.
The specific objective(s) of this call for proposals are:
To protect and empower individuals and CSOs to contribute to the full enjoyment by everyone of all human rights, be they civil, political, economic, social or cultural rights.
• Strengthened the role of CSOs and media in Bosnia and Herzegovina’s EU integration process by building an empowered, well-informed, and coordinated CSO and media sector that actively contributes to policy reforms, democratic governance, and socio-economic development.
• Empowered individuals to fully enjoy all human rights—civil, political, economic, social, and cultural, reinforcing human rights frameworks and supporting democracy in the digital age.
The priorities of this call for proposals are:
Lot 1: To contribute to the consolidation of media freedom, pluralism, and resilience in Bosnia and Herzegovina as a core pillar of democratic governance and EU integration.
Lot 2: Strengthening Rule of Law in particular on areas of Integrity, Accountability and Anti-Corruption Networks. Lot 3: Promote reconciliation and trust-building in Bosnia and Herzegovina through inclusive sport and cultural initiatives that foster dialogue, respect for diversity, and civic engagement aligned with European values.
Lot 4: To support the CSOs Resource Center as a country-wide civil society expert hub for capacity building, knowledge exchange, and policy dialogue and involvement of CSOs as key actors in monitoring and implementing

7 https://enlargement.ec.europa.eu/commission-implementing-decision-242024-financing-multi-country-multiannual-action-
plan-eu-civil_en 8 https://www.gtai.de/resource/blob/1884032/ff3f4efaf6ca2bee09c6d1182c338b82/PRO202503281884002.pdf

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 5 of 33

reforms linked to the EU Growth Plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina and the EU integration agenda.
Lot 5: Support the protection and promotion of human rights and democratic values by empowering individuals, advancing participatory and representative governance, and ensuring that digital transformation and artificial intelligence serve human dignity and inclusion.
NOTE: Proposed action(s) must cover entire country.
1.3. FINANCIAL ALLOCATION PROVIDED BY THE CONTRACTING AUTHORITY
This call is launched under suspensive clause. The overall indicative amount made available under this call for proposals is EUR 5,700,000 from which EUR 4,800,000 is financed from the 2025 CSF budget and EUR 500,000 from the 2025 HRD budget already available, while indicatively EUR 400,000 is to be financed from the 2026 HRD budget, subject to the availability of the appropriations provided for in the general budget of the Union for 2026 (see footnote No. 1).
Specifically,
• LOTs 1 to 4 are financed by the Civil Society Facility for EUR 4,800,000
• LOT 5 is financed by the Thematic Programme for Human Rights and Democracy for EUR 900,000

Indicative allocation of funds by lot: Lot 1: Media - EUR 600,000 Lot 2: Rule of Law – EUR 600,000 Lot 3: Reconciliation through sport and culture – EUR 1,000,000 Lot 4: CSO Resource Center – EUR 2,600,000 Lot 5: Human Rights and Democracy – EUR 900,000
The contracting authority reserves the right not to award all available funds.
If the allocation indicated for a specific lot cannot be used due to insufficient quality or number of proposals received, the contracting authority reserves the right to reallocate the remaining funds to other lots.
Size of grants Any grant requested under Lot 1 must fall between the following minimum and maximum amounts:
• maximum amount: EUR 600,000 Any grant requested under Lot 2 must fall between the following minimum and maximum amounts:
• maximum amount: EUR 600,000 Any grant requested under Lot 3 must fall between the following minimum and maximum amounts:
• maximum amount: EUR 1,000,000 Any grant requested under Lot 4 must fall between the following minimum and maximum amounts:
• maximum amount: EUR 2,600,000 Any grant requested under Lot 5 must fall between the following minimum and maximum amounts:
• maximum amount: EUR 900,000

Any grant requested under Lot 1 to Lot 4 must fall between the following minimum and maximum percentages of total eligible costs of the action:
• Minimum percentage: 80% of the total eligible costs of the action.
• Maximum percentage: 90 % of the total eligible costs of the action (see also Section 2.1.4).

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 6 of 33

Grant requested under Lot 5 must fall between the following minimum and maximum percentages of total eligible costs of the action
• Minimum percentage: 80% of the total eligible costs of the action.
• Maximum percentage: 95 % of the total eligible costs of the action (see also Section 2.1.4).
• The balance (i.e. the difference between the total cost of the action and the amount requested from the contracting authority) must be financed from sources other than the general budget of the Union or the European Development Fund9.
2. RULES FOR THIS CALL FOR PROPOSALS These guidelines set out the rules for the submission, selection and implementation of the actions financed under this call, in conformity with the practical guide (PRAG), which is applicable to the present call (available on the internet at this address https://wikis.ec.europa.eu/display/ExactExternalWiki/ePRAG ).10
2.1. ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA There are three sets of eligibility criteria, relating to:
(1) the actors (2.1.1.):
• The ‘lead applicant’, i.e. the entity submitting the application form; • Its co-applicants (where it is not specified otherwise the lead applicant and its co- applicant(s)
are hereinafter jointly referred as ‘applicant(s)’);
• and, if any, affiliated entity(ies) to the lead applicant and/or to a co-applicant(s);
(2) the actions (2.1.3.):
• actions for which a grant may be awarded;
(3) the eligible costs or results/conditions (2.1.4.):
• where the grant takes the form of reimbursement of costs (totally or partially): the eligible costs, the types of cost that may be taken into account in setting the amount of the grant. 2.1.1. Eligibility of applicants (i.e. lead applicant and co-applicant(s)) Lead applicant In order to be eligible for a grant, the lead applicant must:
• be a legal person and • be non-profit-making and • be a specific type of organisation such as: non-governmental organisation11, including civil society
organisations12

9 Where a grant is financed by the European Development Fund, any mention of European Union financing must be understood as referring to European Development Fund financing.
10 Note that a lead applicant (i.e. a coordinator) whose pillars have been positively assessed by the European Commission and who is awarded a grant will not sign the standard grant contract published with these guidelines but a contribution agreement based on the contribution agreement template. All references in these guidelines and other documents related to this call to the standard grant contract shall in this case be understood as referring to the relevant provisions of the contribution agreement template.
11 For the avoidance of doubt, non-governmental organisation means a voluntary, independent from government, nonprofit organisation, which is not a political party or a trade union, (Article 2(48) FR).
12 The broadest possible understanding about civil society organisations is applied under this call for proposals, as defined in 1999 by the European Economic and Social Committee (CES/1999/851) and further detailed by both the EESC (CES/1999/851, CES/2000/81) and the EC (COM/2002/0704 final, COM/2005/0290 final).

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 7 of 33

• be effectively established in13 Bosnia and Herzegovina and or be effectively estabished in a Member State of the European Union or in any eligible country, as stipulated in the basic act NDICI-GE14 ,(Article 28 of the Regulation (EU) 2021/947 of the European Parliament and of the Council)
• be directly responsible for the preparation and management of the action with the co-applicant(s) and affiliated entity(ies), not acting as an intermediary, and
• not being in any of the situations listed in Section 2.4. of the practical guide
The lead applicant must act with co-applicant(s) as specified hereafter. If awarded the grant contract, the lead applicant will become the beneficiary identified as the coordinator in Annex G (special conditions). The coordinator is the sole interlocutor of the contracting authority. It represents and acts on behalf of any other co-beneficiary (if any) and coordinate the design and implementation of the action.
Co-applicant(s)
For ALL lots: The lead applicant must have at least 2 co-applicants. In case the lead applicant is not effectively established in Bosnia and Herzegovina, it must act with at least 2 co-applicants that are effectively established in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Co-applicants participate in designing and implementing the action, and the costs they incur are eligible in the same way as those incurred by the lead applicant. Co-applicants must satisfy the eligibility criteria as applicable to the lead applicant himself. Co-applicants must sign the mandate in Annex A.2 Section 5. If awarded the grant contract, the co-applicant(s) (if any) will become beneficiary(ies) in the action (together with the coordinator). Affiliated entities The lead applicant and its co-applicant(s) may act with affiliated entity(ies). Only the following entities may be considered as affiliated entities to the lead applicant and/or to co- applicant(s):
Only entities having a structural link with the applicants (i.e. the lead applicant or a co-applicant), in particular a legal or capital link. This structural link encompasses mainly two notions:
(1) Control, as defined in Directive 2013/34/EU on the annual financial statements, consolidated financial statements and related reports of certain types of undertakings: Entities affiliated to an applicant may hence be:
- Entities directly or indirectly controlled by the applicant (daughter companies or first-tier subsidiaries). They may also be entities controlled by an entity controlled by the applicant.granddaughter companies or second-tier subsidiaries) and the same applies to further tiers of control;
- Entities directly or indirectly controlling the applicant (parent companies). Likewise, they may be entities controlling an entity controlling the applicant.

13 To be determined on the basis of the organisation’s statutes, which should demonstrate that it has been established by an instrument governed by the national law of the country concerned and that its head office is located in an eligible country. In this respect, any legal entity whose statutes have been established in another country cannot be considered an eligible local organisation, even if the statutes are registered locally or a ‘Memorandum of Understanding’ has been concluded.
14 With regard to Israeli entities, please follow Guidelines on the eligibility of Israeli entities and their activities in the territories occupied by Israel since June 1967 for grants, prizes and financial instruments funded by the EU from 2014 onwards (OJ C 205, 19.7.2013, p. 9).]

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 8 of 33

- Entities under the same direct or indirect control as the applicant (sister companies).
(ii) Membership, i.e. the applicant is legally defined as a e.g. network, federation, association in which the proposed affiliated entities also participate or the applicant participates in the same entity (e.g. network, federation, association,…) as the proposed affiliated entities.
The structural link shall as a general rule be neither limited to the action nor established for the sole purpose of its implementation. This means that the link would exist independently of the award of the grant; it should exist before the call for proposals and remain valid after the end of the action.
By way of exception, an entity may be considered as affiliated to an applicant even if it has a structural link specifically established for the sole purpose of the implementation of the action in the case of so-called ‘sole applicants’ or ‘sole beneficiaries’. A sole applicant or a sole beneficiary is a legal entity formed by several entities (a group of entities) which together comply with the criteria for being awarded the grant. For example, an association is formed by its members.
What is not an affiliated entity?
The following are not considered entities affiliated to an applicant:
- Entities that have entered into a (procurement) contract or subcontract with an applicant, act as concessionaires or delegatees for public services for an applicant,
- Entities that receive financial support from the applicant,
- Entities that cooperate on a regular basis with an applicant on the basis of a memorandum of understanding or share some assets,
- Entities that have signed a consortium agreement under the grant contract (unless this consortium agreement leads to the creation of a ‘sole applicant’ as described above).
How to verify the existence of the required link with an applicant?
The affiliation resulting from control may in particular be proved on the basis of the consolidated accounts of the group of entities the applicant and its proposed affiliates belong to.
The affiliation resulting from membership may in particular be proved on the basis of the statutes or equivalent act establishing the entity (network, federation, association) which the applicant constitutes or in which the applicant participates.
If the applicants are awarded a grant contract, their affiliated entity(ies) will not become beneficiary(ies) of the action and signatory(ies) of the grant contract. However, they will participate in the design and in the implementation of the action and the costs they incur (including those incurred for implementation contracts and financial support to third parties and subcontractors) may be accepted as eligible costs, provided they comply with all the relevant rules already applicable to the beneficiary(ies) under the grant contract.
Affiliated entity(ies) must satisfy the same eligibility criteria as the lead applicant and the co-applicant(s). They must sign the affiliated entity(ies) statement in Annex A.2 Section 5.

2.1.2. Associates, contractors, recipients of financial support
The following entities are not applicants nor affiliated entities and do not have to sign the ‘mandate for coapplicant(s)’ or ‘affiliated entities' statement:
• Associates
Other organisations or individuals may be involved in the action. Such associates play a real role in the action but may not receive funding from the grant, with the exception of per diem or travel costs. Associates do not have to meet the eligibility criteria referred to in Section 2.1.1. Associates must be mentioned in Annex A.2 Section 4 — ‘Associates participating in the action’.

• Contractors
The beneficiaries and their affiliated entities are permitted to award contracts (subcontracting or implementation contracts). Beneficiaries. affiliated entity(ies), recipients of financial support or associates cannot be also contractors in the project. Contractors are subject to the procurement rules set out in Annex IV to the standard grant

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 9 of 33

contract.
• Recipients of financial support
If allowed by the call for proposals, and under the conditions laid herein and in the grant contract, the beneficiaries and their affiliated are permitted to provide financial support to other third parties. These third parties are neither beneficiaries, affiliated entity(ies) nor associates nor contractors.
Each actor should only participate in a single role in an action. This is to avoid any potential conflicts of interest and ensure clear allocation of rights and obligations as well as certainty on cost eligibility.

2.1.3. Eligible actions: actions for which an application may be made Definition: An action is composed of a set of activities. Duration The initial planned duration of an action for all lots may not be lower than 36 months nor exceed 48 months. Sectors or themes Specific sectors or themes to which the actions must relate to are the following (non-exhaustive list): Lot 1: Media
• Media freedom and independence, ensuring free, independent, and diverse media. • Journalist protection and professional standards supporting quality journalism. • Media literacy, digital skills, and building resilience to disinformation. • Countering disinformation and strengthening the legal framework • Combating harmful content and aligning with EU standards.

Lot 2: Rule of Law • Judicial Independence, Integrity and Performance • Anti-Corruption, Transparency and Accountability • Investigative journalism and cross-border investigative collaborations. • Monitoring and analysis of public procurement, state aid, concessions and high-risk sectors. • Advocacy on whistle-blower protection, implementation of integrity frameworks and conflict-of-interest rules. • Monitoring and reporting on asset declarations, beneficial ownership transparency and illicit enrichment risks. • Community-level anti-corruption initiatives and civic oversight of local governance. • Digital transparency tools and open-data platforms enabling public scrutiny of institutions.

Lot 3: Reconciliation through sport and culture • Cultural and Academic Exchange and Dialogue • Building Social Cohesion and Inclusion • Healing and Trauma Recovery • Youth and Children Engagement and Empowerment
EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 10 of

• Sustainable Development and Long-Term Impact through investments in infrastructure • Collaboration Between Institutions
Lot 4: CSO Resource center • Good governance, Democracy • Civic engagement, participation. • Civil Society capacity building and enabling environment • Economic development and local governance • EU Reform and Growth Plan Implementation • Environment and climate change, including air pollution
Lot 5: Human Rights and Democracy • Human rights and equality • Human rights defenders • Social inclusion and inter-cultural dialogue • Protection against exploitation and vulnerability • Digital rights and technological advancements • Human rights legislation and EU Alignment
Location Actions must take place in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Types of action Types of action which may be financed under this call (non-exhaustive list to address all actions listed under each lot): Lot 1: Media
• Support an enabling legal, policy, and institutional framework by promoting structural reforms including Public Broadcasting System that safeguard freedom of expression and media freedom, ensure transparent media ownership, and enhance the functioning and autonomy of self-regulatory and regulatory bodies (e.g., the Communications Regulatory Agency and Press Council) in line with EU and Council of Europe standards and providing expert support to develop the legislative framework in line with EU requirements.
• Support the establishment and functioning of rapid response mechanisms and legal aid funds for journalists facing threats or lawsuits.
• Support the sustainability of independent, local, and minority media outlets by providing training, technical assistance, and financial support to help them produce fact-based, public-interest journalism free from political and economic pressures. This activity directly addresses concerns over media independence, as highlighted in the Progress Report, where political influence over media is often a significant challenge.
• Building capacities for increasing financial self-sufficiencies of media, by increasing revenue generation and attracting advertising; including by improving Audience Measurement Systems
• Increasing the international connections and networking of Bosnian Media, including dissemination of high-quality reporting in the region and in the EU.

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 11 of

Lot 2: Rule of Law
• Promoting transparency, accountability, and integrity in public life through advocacy and civic monitoring of anti-corruption mechanisms, including asset declarations, conflict-of-interest prevention.
• Supporting oversight and policy dialogue on judicial independence, accountability, and performance, as well as justice-sector and public-administration reforms.
• Advancing citizens’ access to information, justice, and legal aid, particularly for vulnerable and marginalised groups.
• Strengthening civil society networks, coalitions, and watchdog organisations that promote good governance, the rule of law, and public integrity.
• Developing and implementing advocacy campaigns on whistle-blower protection, conflict-of-interest rules and integrity frameworks.
• Supporting investigative journalism projects and collaborations, including cross-border investigations and data-driven journalism.
• Conducting awareness-raising campaigns and civic education on integrity, ethics and anti-corruption standards.

Lot 3: Reconciliation through sport and culture
• Foster trust and cooperation across communities by using sport, art, and cultural activities as neutral spaces. Encourage dialogue through shared cultural experiences, festivals, and storytelling that challenge stereotypes and promote common values.
• Integrate peace education into sports, arts, and academic programs, focusing on inclusion, human rights, and non-violence. Teach youth and children conflict resolution, respect for diversity, and civic responsibility.
• Build the capacity of local leaders, community organizations, and cultural/sports figures through training in conflict-sensitive approaches and inclusive event organization. Empower local ownership of peacebuilding initiatives for long-term sustainability.
• Foster partnerships among municipalities, civil society, and cultural/sports associations to sustain peacebuilding networks. Invest in local sports and cultural infrastructure to provide accessible and inclusive opportunities, especially for marginalized youth.

Lot 4: CSO Resource Center (all components must be included in the proposal)
Component 1: Strengthen the institutional and operational capacities of CSOs and creating enabling environment

• Further develop the civil society resource center into a permanent physical hub that offers training spaces, expert advice, and networking opportunities for CSOs, complementing the existing online platform. This will facilitate capacity building, collaboration, and the sharing of best practices among CSOs at all levels.
• Capacity Building for Grassroots and Intermediary CSOs: Organize a series of training programs for grassroots and intermediary CSOs, focusing on organizational management, strategic engagement in EUrelated reforms, and enhancing their professional and technical capacities to ensure sustainability, accountability, and effective participation in policy processes.
• Support for Informal Civic Initiatives: provide targeted capacity-building support to informal civic initiatives, youth groups, and local associations, helping them formalize, network, and gain recognition as credible actors in the decision-making process, enabling them to advocate for local and national reforms.
• Advocate for the creation of legal and fiscal frameworks that enhance the operational environment for CSOs, including tax incentives and public funding mechanisms, ensuring that CSOs have sustainable access to financial resources and legal support for their activities.
• Multi-Sectoral Collaboration: Organize regular multi-sectoral forums and roundtables with CSOs, government representatives, the private sector, and academia to discuss EU integration, reform priorities, and share best practices, fostering collaboration to coordinate and amplify advocacy efforts on key policy issues.

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 12 of

Component 2: Enable effective CSOs participation in EU Reform and Growth Plan monitoring in line with EU requirements
• Establish structured consultation mechanisms between CSOs, government institutions, and the EU to facilitate evidence-based engagement in the design, implementation, and monitoring of EU accession reforms, ensuring that civil society plays an active role in shaping policies related to the Growth Plan priorities, such as rule of law, green transition, and digital transformation.
• Create thematic working groups or networks focused on specific reform areas (e.g., anti-corruption, environment, youth engagement, gender equality) to promote cross-sector collaboration, share research findings, and coordinate monitoring efforts, ensuring that each sector contributes to the broader EU integration agenda.
• Develop analytical and monitoring tools (e.g., dashboards, templates) for CSOs to track BiH’s progress on EU accession and Growth Plan implementation, providing training sessions to ensure effective use of these tools across sectors for consistent, evidence-based monitoring and reporting.
• Facilitate regular policy dialogue channels between CSOs, government institutions, and the EU, enabling the exchange of monitoring findings and policy recommendations, ensuring that CSOs have a direct line of communication to influence the implementation of reforms and EU compliance.
• Provide financial support for EU Integration initiatives: Provide targeted financial support to CSOs for implementing projects that directly contribute to the EU integration and Growth Plan objectives, including initiatives focused on environment, anti-corruption, social inclusion, education, youth empowerment, and other key policy areas, ensuring that CSOs have the resources to actively participate in EU reform processes.
Lot 5: Human Rights and Democracy (all components must be included in the proposal)
Component 1: Protecting and empowering people
• Strengthening the role and capacity of civil society in advocacy and promoting fundamental rights and human rights in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
• Promote, support and ensure the meaningful inclusion and active participation of children and youth in decisions that affect them at all levels, including in EU policy making and implementation.
• Step up action to combat all forms of discrimination on any ground, with a specific attention to multiple and intersecting forms of discrimination including on grounds of sex, race, colour, ethnic or social origin, genetic features, language, religion or belief, political or any other opinion, property, birth, disability, age, sexual orientation and gender identity.
• Step up actions to prevent, denounce and combat all forms of discrimination and harassment against Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Intersex (LGBTI) persons, including LGBTI-phobic violence, hate speech and hate crimes. Actively condemn and combat discriminatory laws policies and practices, including the criminalisation of consenting same-sex relation.
• Victim support services (legal advice, psychosocial care, reparations) for survivors of human trafficking, domestic violence and unlawful detention.
• Advocate for the enjoyment of all human rights by older persons as well as for ensuring adequate and sustainable solutions for their needs.
Component 2: Promoting responsive, inclusive, participatory and representative decision making
• Build capacity for citizen engagement through training of citizens, especially women, youth, and minority groups, to engage in policy dialogues, decision-making, and democratic processes.
• Foster the role of civil society in oversight and accountability in both the public and the private sector, promoting the use of online technologies in accordance with human rights standards, rule of law and democratic principles.
• Promote active citizenship and full participation of all, without discrimination, in public and political life.
• Build the capacities of grassroots civil society organisations, human rights defenders and civic movements to conduct regular monitoring and documentation of human rights violations and abuses.

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 13 of

• Promote structured and regular dialogues between state actors, civil society (including social partners) and the international community and maintain focus on follow-up on relevant recommendations for enhancement of inclusive and participatory decision-making process
Component 3: Promoting human rights and democracy in the use of digital technologies, including artificial intelligence.
• Contribute to the development, evaluation and implementation of the relevant frameworks and international standards that safeguard human rights and democracy in the digital environment.
• Promote adequate due diligence (including mitigation plans) and effective human rights impact assessment.
• Combat disinformation and promote digital rights. • Launch campaigns against misinformation, develop ethical frameworks for AI and surveillance, and
promote privacy rights and responsible AI governance. • Provide capacity building and other support to enable relevant authorities to effectively develop and
implement relevant international standards effectively in the online space (e.g. protection of children, countering hate speech). • Promote discussions and actions to maximise the opportunities of new technologies, including artificial intelligence (AI), while remaining vigilant on the risks that they may pose to human rights and democracies, at international and country level. • Promote the accessibility of technologies for everyone, including persons with disabilities and other persons in vulnerable situations, already at the design stage of new technologies covering all sectors including education. • Strengthen engagement with relevant stakeholders to actively promote and support efforts to implement the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights advancing relevant due diligence standards and working on the implementation of Bosnia and Herzegovina Guidelines for the implementation of the Guiding Principles. • Engage with the business sector on upholding and promoting human rights, anti-corruption measures and best practices on responsible business conduct, corporate social responsibility, due diligence, accountability and access to remedies in a participative manner. • Actions enhancing media literacy and civic awareness in the digital space, including public campaigns and educational programmes that equip citizens—especially youth and vulnerable groups—with the knowledge and skills to exercise their digital rights, identify disinformation, and engage safely online and developing tools enabling reporting and participation in justice-related processes.
The following types of action are ineligible:
• actions concerned only or mainly with individual sponsorships for participation in workshops, seminars, conferences and congresses;
• actions concerned only or mainly with individual scholarships for studies or training courses;
• actions and measures that may result in violation of human rights in partner countries or causing significant adverse effects on the environment or the climate15;
• actions aiming predominantly at charitable donations and profit-making activities;
• actions which are already funded by other Community programmes and undertaken before the date of contract signature.
Types of activity (applies to all lots)
The types of activity that are eligible and may be financed under this call for proposals are those directly contributing to the achievement of the objectives as per section 1.2 above.
Indicative types of activities eligible under this call include (non-exhaustive list): - Capacity-building and training

15

Article 29 NDICI.

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 14 of

- Studies and research - Exchange of knowledge, information and good practices including regional exchange to share good
practices, enhance solidarity, and strengthen resilience to political and economic pressure - Create inclusive platforms for public dialogue, expert discussions, and community engagement though
public forums, conferences, workshops, peer to peer, etc. - Partnership building, networking and cooperation between Civil Society and other relevant stakeholders - Support the digital transformation - Advocacy, campaigning, policy dialogue and activism - Provide expert support to government and parliamentary bodies in drafting and aligning media
legislation with EU standards (e.g., on public broadcasting, transparency of ownership, and access to information) - Facilitation of participation in public consultation, policy formulation and structured dialogue between Civil Society and other relevant stakeholders - Promotion of policy and legal changes aligned with EU standards - Development of ethical standards, professional codes, and accountability mechanisms. - Strengthen civic oversight and accountability through independent monitoring and reporting mechanisms on the implementation of relevant laws, strategies, and budget allocations - Awareness raising, communication and outreach strategies - Financial support to third parties - Small infrastructure interventions which are needed to achieve set objectives - Any other activity that contributes to the objective and priorities under this call for proposals
Financial support to third parties
Applicants shall propose financial support to third parties in order to help achieving the objectives of the action under all lots.
The maximum amount of financial support per third party is EUR 60 000 except where achieving the objectives of the actions would otherwise be impossible or overly difficult, in which case this threshold can be exceeded. A threshold below EUR 60 000 can be set if appropriate.
Financial support to third parties can be extended to individuals active in the area of Media (bloggers, independent journalist, etc), Rule of Law (whistle-blowers), CSO Resource Centre (such as community environmental activists), and Human rights (human rights defenders). They can receive one time support up to 5000 EUR.
In compliance with the present guidelines and notably of any conditions or restrictions in this Section, the lead applicant should define mandatorily in Section 2.1.1 of Annex a.2 (Grant application form – Full application):
(i) the overall objectives, the specific objective(s) and the outputs16 (i.e. the results) to be achieved with the financial support;
(ii) the different types of activities eligible for financial support, on the basis of a fixed list;
(iii) the types of persons or categories of persons which may receive financial support;
(iv) the criteria for selecting these entities and giving the financial support;
(v) the criteria for determining the exact amount of financial support for each third entity; and
(vi) the maximum amount which may be given.
In all events, the mandatory conditions set above for giving financial support (points (i) to (vi)) have to be strictly defined in the grant contract as to avoid any exercise of discretion.]
Recipients of financial support cannot be designated in the lists of EU restrictive measures.
For this Call for proposals the following specific conditions or restrictions apply for financial support to third parties:

16

As per OECD DAC definition, the term ‘results’ includes: ‘impact’ (overall objective), ‘outcome(s)’ (specific

objective(s) and ‘output(s)’.

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 15 of

To be eligible for a financial support to third parties, the recipients of financial support to third parties must:
• be non-governmental organisations (NGOs). They may include civil society organisations (CSOs), grassroot organisations, professional associations, employers’ associations and trade unions, sport organisations, cultural centres, religious organisations, independent foundations, non-profit media organizations, legally registered civil society networks.
• be effectively established in Bosnia and Herzegovina17
In addition,
• the minimum duration of the actions eligible for financial support is 6 months.
• no co-financing can be requested from third parties and 100% of financing must be provided.
• the grant proposals for all lots shall include a financial support to third parties as a main component which must consume minimum 40% of the direct eligible cost of the action (please refer to budget heading 7.2 “Subtotal direct eligible costs of the action: all headings (1-6)” within the Annex B-Budget).
• Individuals, such as independent journalists, bloggers, content creators, human rights defenders, whistle-blowers, community environmental activists can apply for all lots.
• All the types of actions and activities which may be financed under this call are also eligible for financial support to third parties.
Visibility
The applicants must take all necessary steps to ensure the visibility of the European Union as the funder or cofunder of the action, through the correct and prominent display of the EU emblem and relevant funding statement. Unless the European Commission agrees otherwise, actions that are wholly or partially funded by the European Union must ensure the visibility of EU financing by displaying the EU emblem in accordance with the guidelines set out in the Operational guidelines for recipients of EU funding, published by the European Commission.
All measures and activities relating to visibility and, if applicable, communication, must comply with the latest Communication and Visibility Requirements for EU-funded external action, laid down and published by the European Commission Communication and Visibility Requirements for EU External Actions | International Partnerships (europa.eu).
Derogation from contractual visibility obligations is permitted in exceptional situations, which may be required in the framework of this action due to security issues for the staff and beneficiaries, local political sensitivities, when this is in the interest of the beneficiary or the contracting authority. In such cases, visibility tools, products, and channels to be used in promoting a given action will be determined on a case-by-case basis, in consultation and agreement with the EU prior to limiting EU visibility. Requests for derogation from contractual visibility obligations should be included in Annex A.2 – Full application form and negotiated as part of the Special Conditions of the contract.
Number of applications and grants per applicants / affiliated entities
The lead applicant may not submit more than 1 application under this call for proposals.
The lead applicant may not be awarded more than 1 grant under this call for proposals.
The lead applicant may not be a co-applicant or an affiliated entity in another application of the same lot at the same time.
A co-applicant/affiliated entity may not be the co-applicant or affiliated entity in more than 1 applications under this call for proposals.
A co-applicant/affiliated entity may not be awarded more than 1 grant under this call for proposals.

17 To be determined on the basis of the organisation’s statutes, which should demonstrate that it has been established by an instrument governed by the national law of the country concerned and that its head office is located in an eligible country. In this respect, any legal entity whose statutes have been established in another country cannot be considered an eligible local organisation, even if the statutes are registered locally or a ‘Memorandum of Understanding’ has been concluded

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 16 of

Form of the grant The grants awarded under this call for proposals take the following form(s):
- Reimbursement of eligible costs that may be based on any or a combination of the following forms as per Section 2.1.4:
(i) actual costs incurred by the beneficiary(ies) and affiliated entity(ies);

2.1.4. Eligibility of costs and eligibility of results/conditions Reimbursement of costs Where the grant takes the form of reimbursement of costs (entirely or partially), only ‘eligible costs’ can be covered by a grant. The categories of costs that are eligible and non-eligible are indicated below. The budget is both a cost estimate and an overall ceiling for ‘eligible costs’.
Eligible costs will be reimbursed as actual costs.

Eligible direct costs
To be eligible under this call for proposals, costs must comply with the provisions of Article 14 of the general conditions to the standard grant contract (see Annex G of the guidelines).
Recommendations to award a grant are always subject to the condition that the checks preceding the signing of the grant contract do not reveal problems requiring changes to the budget (such as arithmetical errors, inaccuracies, unrealistic costs and ineligible costs). The checks may give rise to requests for clarification and may lead the contracting authority to impose modifications or reductions to address such mistakes or inaccuracies. It is not possible to increase the grant or the percentage of EU co-financing as a result of these corrections.
It is therefore in the applicants' interest to provide a realistic and cost-effective budget.
Contingency reserve
The budget may include a contingency reserve not exceeding 5 % of the estimated direct eligible costs. It can only be used with the prior written authorisation of the contracting authority.
Eligible indirect costs
The indirect costs incurred in carrying out the action may be eligible for flat-rate funding, but the total must not exceed 7 % of the estimated total eligible direct costs (except volunteer costs and project office costs) (in case of actions comprising also financing not linked to costs, to be calculated on the cost-based component). Indirect costs are eligible provided that they do not include costs assigned to another budget heading in the standard grant contract. The lead applicant may be asked to justify the percentage requested before the grant contract is signed. However, once the flat rate has been fixed in the special conditions of the grant contract, no supporting documents need to be provided.
If any of the applicants or affiliated entity(ies) is in receipt of an operating grant financed by the EU, it may not claim indirect costs on its incurred costs within the proposed budget for the action.
Contributions in kind
Contributions in kind mean the provision of goods or services to beneficiaries or affiliated entities free of charge by a third party. As contributions in kind do not involve any expenditure for beneficiaries or affiliated entities, they are not eligible costs (except for personnel costs for the work carried out by volunteers under an action or operating grant if so authorised).
Contributions in kind may not be treated as co-financing. However, if the description of the action as proposed includes contributions in kind, the contributions have to be made.
Ineligible costs
Costs that do not comply with the conditions laid down in the contract are not eligible. The following costs are not eligible:
− debts and debt service charges (interest);

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 17 of

− provisions for losses or potential future liabilities;
− costs declared by the beneficiary(ies) and financed by another action or work programme receiving a European Union (including through EDF) grant;
− purchases of land or buildings, except where necessary for the direct implementation of the action, in which case ownership must be transferred in accordance with Article 7.5 of the general conditions of the standard grant contract, at the latest at the end of the action;
− currency exchange losses; − in kind contributions; − bonuses included in costs of staff; − negative interest charged by banks or other financial institutions; − credit to third parties; − salary costs of the personnel of national administrations

2.1.5. Ethics and values

Absence of conflict of interest

The applicant must not be affected by any conflict of interest and must have no equivalent relation in that respect with other applicants or parties involved in the actions. Any attempt by an applicant to obtain confidential information, enter into unlawful agreements with competitors or influence the evaluation committee or the contracting authority during the process of examining, clarifying, evaluating and comparing applications will lead to the rejection of its application and may result in exclusion decisions for other award procedures and/or financial penalties according to the Financial Regulation in force.

Respect for environmental legislation and core labour standards

Applicants who are awarded a grant must comply with the environmental legislation including multilateral environmental agreements, and with the core labour standards as applicable and as defined in the relevant International Labour Organisation conventions (such as the conventions on freedom of association and collective bargaining; elimination of forced and compulsory labour; abolition of child labour).
Respect of EU values
Applicants who are awarded a grant must commit to and ensure the respect of basic EU values, such as respect for human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and human rights, including the rights of minorities.

Zero tolerance for sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment:

The European Commission applies a policy of 'zero tolerance' in relation to all wrongful conduct which has an impact on the professional credibility of the applicant.

Physical abuse or punishment, or threats of physical abuse, sexual abuse or exploitation, harassment and verbal abuse, as well as other forms of intimidation shall be prohibited.

Successful applicants, (and affiliated entities) other than (i) natural persons (ii) pillar-assessed entities and (iii) governments and other public bodies shall assess their internal policy against sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment (SEA-H) through a self-evaluation questionnaire (Annex L). For grants of EUR 60 000 or less no selfevaluation is required. Such self-evaluation questionnaire is not part of the evaluation of the application by the contracting authority, but is an administrative requirement. See section 6.2.10. of the practical guide.
Anti-corruption and anti-bribery
The applicant shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations and codes relating to anti-bribery and anticorruption. The contracting authority reserves the right to suspend or cancel project financing if corrupt practices of any kind are discovered at any stage of the award process or during the execution of a contract and if the

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 18 of

contracting authority fails to take all appropriate measures to remedy the situation. For the purposes of this provision, ‘corrupt practices’ are the offer of a bribe, gift, gratuity or commission to any person as an inducement or reward for performing or refraining from any act relating to the award of a contract or execution of a contract already concluded with the contracting authority.
Unusual commercial expenses
Applications will be rejected or contracts terminated if it emerges that the award or execution of a contract has given rise to unusual commercial expenses. Such unusual commercial expenses are commissions not mentioned in the main contract or not stemming from a properly concluded contract referring to the main contract, commissions not paid in return for any actual and legitimate service, commissions remitted to a tax haven, commissions paid to a payee who is not clearly identified or commissions paid to a company which has every appearance of being a front company.
Grant beneficiaries found to have paid unusual commercial expenses on projects funded by the European Union are liable, depending on the seriousness of the facts observed, to have their contracts terminated or to be excluded from receiving EU/EDF funds.
Breach of obligations, irregularities or fraud
The contracting authority reserves the right to suspend or cancel the procedure, where the award procedure proves to have been subject to substantial breach of obligations, irregularities or fraud. If substantial breach of obligations, irregularities or fraud are discovered after the award of the contract, the contracting authority may refrain from concluding the contract.

2.2. HOW TO APPLY AND THE PROCEDURES TO FOLLOW

To apply for this call for proposals, lead applicants need to:

I.

Provide information about the organisations involved in the action.

Lead applicants, co-applicants and affiliated entities, other than natural persons, must register in PADOR18 and the lead applicants must make sure that their PADOR profile is up to date.

PADOR is an on-line database in which organisations register and update information concerning their entity. Organisations registered in PADOR get a unique ID (EuropeAid ID), which they must mention in their application.

PADOR is accessible via the website: https://webgate.ec.europa.eu/pador.

Please note that the registration of this data in PADOR is obligatory for this call for proposals.

If it is impossible to register online in PADOR for technical reasons, or for security and confidentiality concerns, lead applicants, co-applicants and/or affiliated entity(ies) must complete the ‘PADOR registration form19 attached
to these guidelines. This form must be sent together with the application, by the submission deadline (see Section 2.2.2.).

The European Commission external action DGs (DG INTPA, DG NEAR, FPI) are migrating the management of their calls and contracts to an online portal based on a register of organisations participating in EU calls for proposals. This online register will apply the "once only" principle: data related to an organisation needs to be submitted only once. This portal will be used as a communication platform for the management of the contract(s). Since you are in the process of applying for a call for proposals financed by DG INTPA, DG NEAR or FPI, it is mandatory to register now in the Commission’s Participant register. This Participant Register will act as an entry point to the future call and contract management portal. By registering you will obtain a Participant Identification Code (PIC, 9-digit number) which will act as your unique identifier. Registration is free of charge. Not registering your organisation might create technical difficulties with the future data migration.

To apply for this call for proposal, it is mandatory for the lead and co-applicants to register in the Participant Register. In order to register your organisation, please follow this link: https://ec.europa.eu/info/fundingtenders/opportunities/portal/screen/how-to-participate/participant- register.

II. Provide information about the action in the documents listed under section 2.2.2. (Where and how to send applications).

18 Natural persons who apply for a grant (if so allowed in the guidelines) do not have to register in PADOR. In this case, the
information included in PROSPECT and in the concept note is sufficient. 19 Which corresponds to Annex F – PADOR Off-line form (practical guide, Annex e13).

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 19 of

Please note that online submission via PROSPECT is obligatory for this call.
It is strongly recommended to register in PADOR well in advance and not to wait until the last minute before the deadline to submit your application in PROSPECT.
Before starting using PADOR and PROSPECT, please read the user guides available on the website. All technical questions related to the use of these systems should be addressed to the IT helpdesk at ec-external- relationsapplication-support@ec.europa.eu via the online support form in PROSPECT.

2.2.1. Application forms

Applications must be submitted in accordance with the instructions on the concept note and the full applications in the grant application form annexed to these guidelines (Annex A). Lead applicants should then keep strictly to the format of the grant application form and fill in the paragraphs and pages in order.

Applicants must apply in English.

Please complete the application form carefully and as clearly as possible so that it can be assessed properly.

WARNING

The title of your proposal will become, if selected, the subject matter of the grant contract that will be signed with your organisation.

On the Europa website, the field ‘Public subject’, using the title of the selected proposal, is used for publication in the Financial Transparency System (FTS) of all EU grants. This field, being intended for the general public, should provide general and clear information on the purpose of the expenditure.

We therefore recommend to define the subject matter of your proposal along the following indications.

An appropriate subject:

•

refers to the content of the project or its objective;

•

does not repeat information available in other fields such as the recipient's name, the programme, the

year;

•

is preferably written in English;

•

may contain acronyms if relevant for the citizens;

•

may contain the reference to the project or programme.

Any error or major discrepancy related to the points listed in the instructions on the concept note or any major inconsistency in the application e.g. if the amounts in the budget worksheets are inconsistent) may lead to the rejection of the application.

Clarifications will only be requested when the information provided is unclear and thus prevents the Contracting Authority from conducting an objective assessment.

Please note that only the grant application form and the published annexes which have to be filled in (budget, logical framework) will be evaluated. It is therefore of utmost importance that these documents contain ALL the relevant information concerning the action.

Please note that incomplete applications may be rejected. Lead applicants are advised to verify that their application is complete using the checklist (Annexes A.1 and A.2, Instructions). If it is impossible to register online in PADOR for technical reasons, or for confidentiality and security concerns, the lead applicant has to submit with the application the completed PADOR registration form (Annex F) for the lead applicant, each co-applicant (if any) and each affiliated entity (if any).

In addition, the following documents shall be submitted by the application deadline together with the application form:

1. The statutes or articles of association of the lead applicant, (if any) of each co-applicant and (if any) of each affiliated entity. Where the contracting authority has recognised the lead applicant’s, or the coapplicant(s)’s, or their affiliated entity(ies)’s eligibility for another call for proposals under the same budget line within 2 years before the deadline for receipt of applications, it shall submit instead, a copy of the document proving their eligibility in a former call (e.g. a copy of the special conditions of a grant contract received during the reference period), unless a change in legal status has occurred in the meantime. This

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 20 of

obligation does not apply to international organisations which have been subject of a pillar assessment.
2. The declaration on honour (Annex H to these guidelines) signed by the lead applicant as well as all applicants and affiliated entities certifying that they are not in one of the exclusion situations (see Section 2.4.2 of the practical guide) where the amount of the grant exceeds EUR 15 000.
3. In addition, for the purpose of the evaluation of the financial capacity, the following documents should be submitted20:
a. For action grants exceeding EUR 750 000 and for operating grants exceeding EUR 100 000, the lead applicant must provide an audit report produced by an approved external auditor where it is available, and always in cases where a statutory audit is required by EU or national law. That report shall certify the lead applicant accounts for up to the last 3 available financial years.
In all other cases, the lead applicant shall provide a self-declaration signed by its authorised representative certifying the validity of its accounts for up to the last 3 available financial years. This requirement shall apply only to the first application made by an applicant to the contracting authority in any one financial year.
The external audit report as well as the self-declaration certifying the validity of the accounts are not required from the co-applicant(s) or affiliated entities (if any).
b. A copy of the lead applicant’s latest accounts (the profit and loss account and the balance sheet for the last financial year for which the accounts have been closed). A copy of the latest account is neither required from the co-applicant(s) (if any) nor from affiliated entity(ies) (if any).

These documents must be supplied in the form of originals (blue ink signature or by applying a qualified electronic signature (QES)21), photocopies or scanned versions of blue-ink originals (i.e. showing legible stamps, signatures and dates). Where photocopies or scanned copies are provided, originals shall be kept on file for controls in accordance with the record keeping obligations laid down in Section 2.5.5. of the practical guide.
Where such documents are not in one of the official languages of the European Union, a translation into English language of the relevant parts of these documents proving the lead applicant's and, where applicable, co-applicants' and affiliated entity(ies)' eligibility, must be submitted for the purpose of analysing the application.
Where these documents are in an official language of the European Union other than English language, it is strongly recommended, in order to facilitate the evaluation, to provide a translation of the relevant parts of the documents, proving the lead applicant's and, where applicable, co-applicants' and affiliated entity(ies)' eligibility, into English language.
Applicants have to take into consideration the time necessary to obtain official documents from national competent authorities and to translate such documents in the authorised languages while registering their data in PADOR.
If the abovementioned supporting documents are not provided by the deadline for the submission of the application form, the application may be rejected.
No additional annexes should be sent.
2.2.2. Where and how to send applications
Applications must be submitted online via PROSPECT https://webgate.ec.europa.eu/prospect following the instructions given in the PROSPECT user manual.
Upon submission of the application online, the lead applicant will receive an automatic confirmation of receipt in its PROSPECT profile.
The other supporting documents, except the declaration on honour on exclusion criteria, shall be uploaded in

20 No supporting documents will be requested for applications for a grant not exceeding EUR 60 000, or the following categories of lead applicants: (i) natural persons in receipt of education support (ii) natural persons most in need, such as unemployed and refugees, and in receipt of direct support (iii) public bodies, including Member State organisations (iv) international organisations.

21 Please note that only the QES within the meaning of Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 (eIDAS Regulation) will be accepted. Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 July 2014 on electronic identification and trust services for electronic transactions in the internal market and repealing Directive 1999/93/EC.

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 21 of

PADOR.
Applications sent by any other means (e.g. by fax or by e-mail) or delivered to other addresses will be rejected. Hand-written applications will not be accepted
2.2.3. Deadline for submission of applications
The deadline for the submission of applications is 20 May 2026 at 17:00 hrs (Brussels date and time). In order to convert this deadline to local time you can use any online time converter tool that takes into account timezones and winter/summer time changes (example available here)22.
Lead applicants are strongly advised not to wait until the last day to submit their applications, since heavy Internet traffic or a fault with the Internet connection (including electricity failure, etc.) could lead to difficulties in submission. The contacting authority cannot be held responsible for any delay due to such aforementioned difficulties.
Any application submitted after the deadline will be rejected.

2.2.4. Further information about applications

Questions may be sent by e-mail no later than 21 days before the deadline for the submission of applications to the below address(es), indicating clearly the reference of the call for proposals:

E-mail address: delegation-bosnia-and-herzegovina-cfp@eeas.europa.eu

The contracting authority has no obligation to provide clarifications to questions received after this date.

Replies will be given no later than 11 days before the deadline for the submission of applications.

To ensure equal treatment of applicants, the contracting authority cannot give a prior opinion on the eligibility of lead applicants, co-applicants, affiliated entity(ies), an action or specific activities.

No individual replies will be given to questions. All questions and answers as well as other important notices to

applicants during the course of the evaluation procedure will be published on the website where the call was

published:

website DG International Partnerships https://ec.europa.eu/international-

partnerships/home_fr and/or Funding & Tender opportunities (F&T Portal) https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-

tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/home and the EU Delegation to Bosnia and Herzegovina web site

https://www.eeas.europa.eu/eeas/grants_en?f%5B0%5D=grant_site%3ABosnia%20and%20Herzegovin a&s=219, as the need arises.

It is therefore advisable to consult the abovementioned website(s) regularly in order to be informed of the questions and answers published.

All questions related to registration in PADOR or the online submission via PROSPECT should be addressed to the IT helpdesk at ec-external-relations-application-support@ec.europa.eu via the online support form in PROSPECT: please note that the working languages of the IT support are English, French and Spanish. Therefore, users are invited to send their questions in in English, French or Spanish should they wish to benefit from an optimum response time.

Please note that the contracting authority may decide to cancel the call for proposals procedure at any stage according to the conditions set out in Section 6.5.9 of the practical guide.

2.3. EVALUATION
Applications will be examined and evaluated by the contracting authority with the possible assistance of external assessors. All applications will be assessed according to the following steps and criteria.
If the examination of the application reveals that the proposed action does not meet the eligibility criteria stated in Section 2.1, the application will be rejected on this sole basis.

22 For example: http://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/converter.html.
EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 22 of

2.3.1. STEP 1: ADMINISTRATIVE CHECKS AND CONCEPT NOTE EVALUATION During the administrative check the following will be assessed:

• If the application satisfies all the criteria specified in the checklist in Annex A.2, Instructions. This includes also an assessment of the eligibility of the action. If any of the requested information is missing or is incorrect, the application may be rejected on that sole basis and the application will not be evaluated further.

The concept notes that pass this check will be evaluated on the relevance and design of the proposed action.

The concept notes will receive an overall score out of 50 using the breakdown in the evaluation grid below. The evaluation will also check on compliance with the instructions on how to complete the concept note, which can be found in Annex A.1.

The evaluation criteria are divided into headings and subheadings. Each subheading will be given a score between 1 and 5 as follows: 1 = very poor; 2 = poor; 3 = adequate; 4 = good; 5 = very good.

Evaluation Grid Section

Maximum Score

1. Relevance of the action

20

1.1. Consistency with the objectives of the call: How relevant is the proposal to the objectives 5 and priorities of the call for proposals and to the specific themes/sectors/areas or any other specific requirement stated in the guidelines for applicants? Are the expected results of the action aligned with the priorities defined in the guidelines for applicants (section 1.2)?

1.2. Relevance to the country/region/sector needs: How relevant is the proposal to the particular 5 needs and constraints of the target country(ies), region(s) and/or relevant sectors (including synergy with other development initiatives and avoidance of duplication)?

1.3. Target groups and final beneficiaries: How clearly defined and strategically chosen are the 5 target groups and final beneficiaries? Have their needs (as rights holders and/or duty bearers) and constraints been clearly defined? Does the proposal address them appropriately?

1.4. Added value elements: Does the proposal contain particular added-value elements (e.g.

5

innovation, best practices) and the other additional elements indicated under 1.2. of the

guidelines for applicants?

2. Design of the action

30

2.1. Intervention logic. Does the proposal indicate the expected results (outputs/outcomes/impacts) to be achieved by the action? Does the design of the proposed action identify explicitly the necessary sequence to achieve the desired objectives beginning with inputs, moving through activities and outputs, and culminating in outcomes and impacts?

5x2**

2.2. Context analysis. Does the design of the action include a robust analysis of the needs to be 5 addressed, including the capacities of the relevant stakeholders? Are those also embedded adequately in the intervention logic?

2.3. Risks and assumptions. Is the design based on clear assumptions (the necessary and

5

positive conditions that allow for a successful cause-and-effect relationship between different

levels of results)? Does it take into account also risks (the factors that might hinder the

achievement of results)?

2.4. Indicative Activities. Is the indicative list of activities linked to and consistent with the

5

expected outputs?

2.5. Cross-cutting issues: To which extent does the proposal integrate relevant cross-cutting

5

elements such as environmental/climate change issues, promotion of gender equality and equal

opportunities, needs of disabled people, rights of minorities and rights of indigenous peoples,

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 23 of

youth, combating HIV/AIDS (if there is a strong prevalence in the target country/region)?

Maximum total score

50

**: this score is multiplied by 2 because of its importance

Once all concept notes have been assessed, a list will be drawn up with the proposed actions ranked according to their total score.

Firstly, only the concept notes with a score of at least 30 will be considered for pre-selection.

Secondly, the number of concept notes will be reduced, taking account of the ranking, to the number of concept notes whose total aggregate amount of requested contributions is equal to at least 200% of the available budget for this call for proposals. The amount of requested contributions of each concept note will be based on the indicative financial envelopes for each lot, where relevant.

Lead applicants will receive a letter indicating the reference number of their application and the respective results. This letter will automatically appear online in the PROSPECT profile of the lead applicant.

The evaluation committee will then proceed with the lead applicants whose proposals have been preselected.

2.3.2. STEP 2: EVALUATION OF THE FULL APPLICATION

If the applications pass the administrative checks along the instructions of the Step 1, they will be further evaluated on their quality, including the proposed budget and capacity of the applicants and affiliated entity(ies). They will be evaluated using the evaluation criteria in the evaluation grid below. There are two types of evaluation criteria: selection and award criteria.

The selection criteria help to evaluate the applicant(s)'s and affiliated entity(ies)'s operational capacity and the lead applicant's financial capacity and are used to verify that they:

• have stable and sufficient sources of finance to maintain their activity throughout the proposed action and, where appropriate, to participate in its funding (this only applies to lead applicants);

• have the management capacity, professional competencies and qualifications required to successfully complete the proposed action. This applies to applicants and any affiliated entity(ies).

For the purpose of the evaluation of the financial capacity, lead applicants must ensure that the relevant information and documents (i.e. accounts of the latest financial year and external audit report, where applicable) are up to date, either in their PADOR profile or when submitting the requested documents with the PADOR registration form. If the information and documents requested are outdated and do not allow for a proper evaluation of the financial capacity, the application may be rejected.

The award criteria help to evaluate the quality of the applications in relation to the objectives and priorities set forth in the guidelines, and to award grants to projects which maximise the overall effectiveness of the call for proposals. They help to select applications which the contracting authority can be confident will comply with its objectives and priorities. They cover the relevance of the action, its consistency with the objectives of the call for proposals, quality, expected impact, sustainability and cost-effectiveness.

Scoring:

The evaluation grid is divided into Sections and subsections. Each subsection will be given a score between 1 and 5 as follows: 1 = very poor; 2 = poor; 3 = adequate; 4 = good; 5 = very good.

Evaluation grid

Section

Maximum Score

1. Financial and operational capacity

20

1.1. Do the applicants and, if applicable, their affiliated entity(ies) have sufficient in-house

5

experience of project management?

1.2. Do the applicants and, if applicable, their affiliated entity(ies) have sufficient technical

5

in-house expertise (especially knowledge of the issues to be addressed)?

1.3. Do the applicants and, if applicable, their affiliated entity(ies) have sufficient

5

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 24 of

management in-house capacity (including staff, equipment and ability to handle the budget for the action)?

1.4. Does the lead applicant have stable and sufficient sources of finance?

5

2. Relevance of the action

20

2.1. Consistency with the objectives of the call: How relevant is the proposal to the objectives

and priorities of the call for proposals and to the specific themes/sectors/areas or any other specific requirement stated in the guidelines for applicants? Are the expected results of the

5

action aligned with the priorities defined in the guidelines for applicants (section 1.2)?

2.2. Relevance to the country/region/sector needs: How relevant is the proposal to the

particular needs and constraints of the target country(ies), region(s) and/or relevant sectors

5

(including synergy with other development initiatives and avoidance of duplication)?

2.3. Target groups and final beneficiaries: How clearly defined and strategically chosen are

the target groups and final beneficiaries? Have their needs (as rights holders and/or duty

5

bearers) and constraints been clearly defined? Does the proposal address them appropriately?

2.4. Added value elements: Does the proposal contain particular added-value elements (e.g.

innovation, best practices) and the other additional elements indicated under 1.2. of the

5

guidelines for applicants?

3. Design of the action

15

3.1. Intervention logic. Does the proposal indicate the expected results

5

(outputs/outcomes/impacts) to be achieved by the action? Does the design of the proposed

action identify explicitly the necessary sequence to achieve the desired objectives

beginning with inputs, moving through activities and outputs, and culminating in outcomes

and impacts? Is the indicative list of activities linked to and consistent with the expected

outputs?

3.2. Logical Framework Matrix: Is the logical framework provided in Annex C complete?

5

Does each result (output, outcome, impact) include an adequate number of indicators that

are sufficient in scope to measure its achievement? Is each indicator RACER (Relevant,

Accepted, Credible, Easy to monitor, Robust)? Does each indicator have a baseline value

(with year), target value (with year), and a credible source of data? If baselines and

targets are not available, this is to be justified and a study (or other relevant tools) to be

foreseen and budgeted in the proposal? In the case of use of FNLC, are the FNLC results

and indicators clearly marked?

3.3. Context analysis. Does the design of the action include a robust analysis of the needs to

5

be addressed, including the capacities of the relevant stakeholders? Are those also

embedded adequately in the intervention logic?

4. Implementation approach

15

4.1. Action plan: Is the action plan for implementing the action clear and feasible? Are types

5

of activities clearly clustered by output in the Activities Matrix? Is the timeline realistic?

4.2. Monitoring, reporting and evaluation: Does the proposal include an effective and

5

efficient monitoring and reporting system? Is the system in place adequate to update the

values of the indicators included in the Logical Framework Matrix - thus informing

regularly on progress towards the achievement of impact, outcomes and outputs? Is there

an evaluation planned and budgeted (previous, during or/and at the end of the

implementation)? If relevant, is the role of third party assessor included?

4.3. Project management (technical): Do the co-applicant(s) and (if applicable) their affiliated

5

entities have the necessary technical skills to attain the objectives of the action? Are the

co-applicant(s)’s and affiliated entity(ies)’s adequately involved in the implementation

(e.g. advocacy, research, capacity building, outreach related activities)?

5. Sustainability of the action

15

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 25 of

5.1. Long-lasting benefits: Is the action likely to ensure long lasting and transformative benefits to the target groups and the final beneficiaries?
5.2. Multiplier effects: Is the action likely to have multiplier effects, including scope for replication, extension, cross-fertilisation of experience and knowledge sharing?
5.3. Sustainability How likely the effects are to last after the intervention ends?- Financial sustainability: which financial resources are available to fund the continuation of the services provided by the intervention? How long are they likely to be available and from which sources?)- Institutional sustainability: which institutional arrangements allow for maintaining the benefits achieved? Is there any measure in place to ensure local ownership?- Policy level sustainability (if applicable): is there any expected policy related effect from the action, e.g. improved legislation, codes of conduct, methodsEnvironmental sustainability (if applicable): will the action have a negative/positive environmental impact?- Risk analysis and mitigation measures: will the action be accompanied by a good risk analysis (including physical, environmental, political, economic and social risks) and relevant mitigation measures?
6. Budget and cost-effectiveness of the action
6.1. Budget: Are the activities appropriately reflected in the budget? In the case of entire of partly use of financing not linked to costs, are the results and performance indicators adequately reflected in the budget?
6.2. Efficiency: Is the relation between the estimated amounts as per budget and the expected results adequate?
Maximum total score
**: this score is multiplied by 2 because of its importance

5 5 5
15 5 5x2** 100

If the total score for Section 1 (financial and operational capacity) is less than 12 points, the application will be rejected. If the score for at least one of the subsections under Section 1 is 1, the application will also be rejected. If the lead applicant applies without co-applicants or affiliated entities the score for point 4.3 shall be 5 unless the involvement of co-applicants or affiliated entities is mandatory according to these guidelines for applicants.
Provisional selection
After the evaluation, a table will be drawn up listing the applications ranked according to their score. The highest scoring applications will be provisionally selected until the available budget for this call for proposals is reached. In addition, a reserve list will be drawn up following the same criteria. This list will be used if more funds become available during the validity period of the reserve list. The contracting authority informs those lead applicants provisionally selected and those placed on the reserve list, that they will be subject to the final eligibility check.

2.3.3. STEP 3: VERIFICATION OF ELIGIBILITY OF THE APPLICANTS AND AFFILIATED ENTITY(IES) AND OTHER SUPPORTING DOCUMENTS
The eligibility verification will be performed on the basis of the supporting documents requested by the contracting authority (see Section 2.2.1). It will by default only be performed for the applications that have been provisionally selected (including those placed on the reserve list) according to their score and within the available budget for this call for proposals. In this case:
• The declaration by the lead applicant (Section 5 of Annex A.2) will be cross-checked with the supporting documents provided by the lead applicant. Any missing supporting document or any incoherence between the declaration by the lead applicant and the supporting documents may lead to the rejection of the application on that sole basis.
• The eligibility of applicants and the affiliated entity(ies) will be verified according to the criteria set out in Section 2.1.1. including exclusion criteria.

Any rejected application will be replaced by the next best placed application on the reserve list that falls within the available budget for this call for proposals.

In the eventuality that the evaluation committee is not satisfied with the strength, solidity, and guarantee offered by the structural link between one of the applicants and its affiliated entity, it can require the submission of the missing documents allowing for its conversion into co-applicant. If all the missing documents for co-applicants are

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 26 of

submitted, and provided all necessary eligibility criteria are fulfilled, the above mentioned entity becomes a coapplicant for all purposes. The lead applicant has to submit the application form revised accordingly.

2.4. AWARD DECISION
After verifying the supporting documents (step 3), the evaluation committee will make a final recommendation to the contracting authority, which will decide on the award of grants.
The contracting authority may decide not to award any grants and cancel the call for proposals without having the applicants any right to compensation.
The award decision shall indicate the successful applicants, the names of the applicants rejected, and a reserve list (if any).

2.5. NOTIFICATION OF THE CONTRACTING AUTHORITY’S DECISION
The lead applicants will be informed in writing of the contracting authority’s decision concerning their application.
In case of rejection, they will be informed about the reasons for the negative decision. For the avoidance of doubt, please note that for applications rejected for reasons such as non-compliance with the admissibility requirements (for example, if the application was sent after the deadline), with the eligibility (the entity or person is not part of the predefined eligible population of entities or persons), the selection (the entity does not have financial capacity or professional or operational capacity) and the award criteria (the proposal does not comply with the predefined requirements such as quality, cost/efficiency), no prior adversarial procedure is required.
Applicants placed on the reserve list will also be informed. The applicable terms to the reserve list are laid down in Section 6.5. of the practical guide.
The successful applicants shall also be informed, and will be requested to provide some information and documents, including (for grants exceeding EUR 60 000) the self evaluation questionnaire on SEA-H. The lead applicant as well as all co-applicants and affiliated entities other than (i) natural persons (ii) pillar- assessed entities and (iii) governments and other public bodies shall fill in the self-evaluation questionnaire assessing the organisation’s internal policy and procedures against sexual exploitation, abuse and harassment (SEA-H) (Annex L) (see Section 6.2.10 of the practical guide).
This letter will be sent by e-mail and will appear online automatically in the PROSPECT profile of the user who submitted the application. Lead applicants who, in exceptional cases (see section 2.2), had to submit their application by post, private courier or hand-delivery will be informed by e-mail or by post if they did not provide any e-mail address. Therefore, please check regularly your PROSPECT profile, taking into account the indicative timetable below. Please note that the lead applicant is the intermediary for all communications between applicants and the contracting authority during the procedure.
Successful applicants will also be informed if the first instalment of pre-financing is subject to the validation of a financial guarantee by the contracting authority. In this case, the applicant will be requested to send the guarantee in time to proceed to the payment of the first instalment in accordance with the payment provisions of the grant contract.
An applicant believing that it has been harmed by an error or irregularity during the award process may lodge a complaint. See Section 2.12 of the practical guide.

2.6. SIGNATURE OF THE GRANT CONTRACT
Following the decision to award a grant, the beneficiary(ies) will be offered a contract based on the standard grant contract (see Annex G of these guidelines). By signing the application form (Annex A of these guidelines), the applicants agree, if awarded a grant, to accept the contractual conditions of the standard grant contract. Where the coordinator is an organisation whose pillars have been positively assessed, it will sign a contribution agreement based on the contribution agreement template. In this case, references to provisions of the standard grant contract and its annexes shall not apply. References in these guidelines to the grant contract shall be understood as references to the relevant provisions of the contribution agreement.
The budget proposed for the action by the successful applicants at the call for proposals stage must be corrected to remove any obvious arithmetical errors or ineligible costs prior to signing the contract. The description of the action is corrected accordingly if need be.
The contracting authority may decide that other clarifications or minor corrections may be made to the description

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 27 of

of the action or to the budget in so far as they do not call into question the grant award decision, do not conflict with equal treatment of applicants, and:
• relate to matters clearly identified by the evaluation committee; or • aim at taking into consideration changes that have occurred since the date of receipt of the proposal.
These amendments cannot lead to an increase in either the amount of the grant or the percentage of the European Union contribution as set in the guidelines of the call for proposals. In this respect, records of the contacts with the applicants must be kept on the file.
In no case the conditions announced in the guidelines can be altered at this stage. Apart from the abovementioned clarifications and/or corrections, any other alteration of the initial proposal or deviation from the award conditions laid down in the guidelines is strictly prohibited.
Any other alteration to the successful applicant’s proposal, or negotiation of it, is prohibited.
2.7. INDICATIVE TIMETABLE

1. Information meeting (if any)

DATE 19 March 2026

TIME 10.00 am

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 28 of

2. Deadline for requesting any clarifications from the contracting authority
3. Last date on which clarifications are issued by the contracting authority

30 April 2026 09 May 2026

4. Deadline for submission of applications
5. Information to lead applicants on administrative checks and concept note evaluation (Step 1)
6. Notification of the contracting authority decision
7. Contract signature

20 May 2026 June/July 2026
September 2026 October/November 2026

17:00 hrs CET -
17:00 hrs CET
-

This indicative timetable refers to provisional dates (except for dates 2, 3, and 4) and may be updated by the

contracting authority during the procedure. In such cases, the updated timetable will be published on the web site

where the call was published:

website of DG International Partnerships

https://ec.europa.eu/international-partnerships/home_fr and/or Funding & Tender opportunities (F&T Portal)

https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/home

and and

the EU Delegation to Bosnia and Herzegovina web site:

https://www.eeas.europa.eu/eeas/grants_en?f%5B0%5D=grant_site%3ABosnia%20and%20Herzegovina&s=219

2.8. EARLY DETECTION AND EXCLUSION SYSTEM
Applicants and, if they are legal entities, persons who have powers of representation, decision-making or control over them, natural or legal person that assumes unlimited liability for the debts, natural or legal person who is essential for the award or for the implementation of the legal commitment, beneficial owner or any affiliate of the applicant, are informed that, should they be in one of the situations of early detection or exclusion, their personal details (name, given name if natural person, address, legal form) may be registered in the early detection and exclusion system, and communicated to the persons and entities concerned in relation to the award or the execution of a grant contract.

For more information, you may consult the privacy statement available on http://ec.europa.eu/budget/explained/management/protecting/protect_en.cfm

3. LIST OF ANNEXES

DOCUMENTS TO BE COMPLETED

Annex A

Grant application form (Word format)

A.1

Concept note

A.2

Full application form

Annex B

Budget (Excel format)

Annex C

Logical framework (Excel format)

Annex D

[Not applicable]

Annex E

[Not applicable]

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 29 of

Annex F Annex H Annex L

PADOR registration form Declaration on Honour on exclusion criteria Self-evaluation questionnaire on SEA-H

DOCUMENTS FOR INFORMATION33

Annex G

Standard grant contract

Annex II

General conditions

Annex IV

Contract award rules

Annex V

Standard request for payment

Annex VI Annex VII-A

Model narrative and financial report
Model report of factual findings and terms of reference for an expenditure verification of an EU financed grant contract for external action

Annex IX Annex I

Standard template for transfer of ownership of assets
Daily allowance rates (per diem), available at the following address: https://international-partnerships.ec.europa.eu/funding/guidelines/managingproject/diem-rates_en (as all necessary information is available via the link the publication of the annex is optional)

Annex J

Information on the tax regime applicable to grant contracts signed under the call.

USEFUL LINKS PRAG Project Cycle Management Guidelines The implementation of grant contracts, A Users' Guide
Financial Toolkit23
Early Detection and Exclusion System (EDES)

https://wikis.ec.europa.eu/display/ExactExternalWiki/ePRAG
https://ec.europa.eu/internationalpartnerships/funding/managing-project_en
https://wikis.ec.europa.eu/spaces/ExactExternalWiki/pages/95 551590/19.+The+implementation+of+grant+contracts+%E2% 80%93+A+users%E2%80%99+guide+2023 https://ec.europa.eu/international-partnerships/financialmanagement-toolkit_en https://commission.europa.eu/strategy-and-policy/eubudget/how-it-works/annual-lifecycle/implementation/antifraud-measures/edes_en#data-protection

23 Please note that the toolkit is not part of the grant contract and has no legal value. It merely provides general guidance and may in some details differ from the signed grant contract. In order to ensure compliance with their contractual obligations beneficiaries should not exclusively rely on the toolkit but always consult their individual contract documents.

EuropeAid/185979/DH/ACT/BA 2025 Guidelines for grant applicant open (en).docx

Page 30 of

