INSTRUMENTO: Fostering equity and justice in climate policies – Societal Readiness Pilot
IDENTIFICADOR: HORIZON-CL5-2025-06-D1-06
AVISO: HORIZON-CL5-2025-06
CALL TITLE: Cluster 5 Call 06-2025 (WP 2025)
PROGRAMA: {'id': 43108390, 'abbreviation': 'HORIZON', 'description': 'Horizon Europe (HORIZON)'}
DIVISAO:  |  | 
TIPO DE ACAO: HORIZON Lump Sum Grant
DOTACAO:
2025: EUR 15,000,000
2025: EUR 12,000,000
2025: EUR 4,000,000
2025: EUR 30,000,000
2025: EUR 7,500,000
2025: EUR 56,000,000
2025: EUR 15,000,000
PRAZO: 2025-09-24 | 2025-09-24 | 2025-09-24 | 2025-09-24 | 2025-09-24 | 2025-09-24 | 2025-09-24
PALAVRAS-CHAVE: 

DESCRICAO:
Expected Outcome: Project results are expected to contribute to all of the following expected outcomes: Climate policies are made more inclusive and equitable, facilitating acceptance across political and societal stakeholders with various socio-economic and development status, both within the EU and globally, enabling high ambition climate action and helping to deliver on the European Green Deal’s commitment to “leave no one behind”; There is an improved consensus between the Global North and the Global South within the UNFCCC process, unlocking a greater momentum in the implementation of the Paris Agreement; The evidence base underpinning IPCC assessments is strengthened, diversified, and made more inclusive, facilitating consensus and government approval processes; Social science perspectives on justice and equity are better incorporated into policy narratives, scenarios, and models, improving their societal relevance and ensuring that climate action strategies are more reflective of the needs, values and concerns of diverse societal groups, building trust in results and outcomes, and increasing their uptake potential. Scope: Climate change and the transition to low-carbon, climate-resilient future raises complex justice questions around equitable sharing of benefits and burdens of mitigation and adaptation efforts. These considerations not only animate global climate negotiations, but also increasingly emerge as a central issue for national politics, legal systems and for the society at large. Fairness thus becomes both a critical enabler and a potential barrier for shaping ambitious climate action, underscoring the need for prioritising research on advancing just climate transitions within the EU and globally. For example, mitigation scenarios that have informed and influenced global climate policymaking and target-setting, and form a vital component of IPCC assessments, have been criticised for not considering fairness more explicitly and systematically, creating a barrier to their acceptance as a basis for global mitigation efforts. On the other hand, to avoid exacerbating existing vulnerabilities and locking into maladaptive pathways, it is also necessary to better account for the justice dimension in adaptation planning and implementation. Actions should advance more comprehensive and interdisciplinary understanding of climate justice in the context of the European and global mitigation and adaptation policies, promoting awareness, consistency and co-production approaches. They should take into consideration socio-economic, territorial and development disparities that exist between and within countries, regions and across various segments of the population. Actions should address multiple dimensions of justice, diverse spatial and temporal scales (e.g., intergenerational justice), and explore the role of a broad range of social, political, economic, and cultural contexts and factors. These include both collective (such as values, power structures, institutional and legal frameworks, political economy, development models, climate elites) and individual (such as age, gender, and intersectionality) features. Building on the resulting insights, actions are expected to develop recommendations on how to design, implement and evaluate just climate transitions, including definition of specific indicators, standards, and criteria to better operationalise the justice concept in adaptation and mitigation pathways. Among others, actions should address some of the following aspects [1] : Improve integrated assessment models to better represent justice and equity, differences in regional outcomes, and common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities; Enhance clarity, comparability, and transparency across global mitigation scenarios with regard to different justice aspects. Evaluate the feasibility and consistency of regionally differentiated long-term mitigation goals in terms of, for example, investments and financial flows, governance and institutional needs; Analyse distributional aspects of climate policies, assess consequences for well-being and living standards of people from different socio-economic and development contexts. Advance research to assess the needs of and the effects on the most vulnerable and disadvantaged population segments (e.g., elderly, children, women, migrants, minorities, households at risk from energy and/or transport poverty) and sectors, and provide recommendations for corrective measures; Assess the trade-offs and co-benefits between climate action and inequality reduction. Explore the role of inequality and injustice as constraints to individual and collective climate action; Investigate innovative climate policy instruments, initiatives and approaches alternative to those prioritising economic efficiency and propose a broader spectrum of climate policies with more attention to equity. Assess their feasibility; Investigate justice in the context of sectorial transitions, with focus on under-researched (from justice perspective) sectors such as agriculture, forestry and land use; Advance research on how to better account for the needs and constraints of communities representing diversity of vulnerability profiles in disaster risk reduction and adaptation strategies. Actions should address justice and equity of climate policies both within the EU and from a global perspective, but they may choose to prioritise one of these dimensions, using the other as framing information. The research should be conducted through close collaboration between research teams from Europe and low or middle-income countries, hence international cooperation is required (see eligibility conditions). Moreover, involvement of key stakeholders and regional experts as part of an inclusive process is essential to guarantee that all relevant perspectives are adequately represented. The involvement of civil society is also highly recommended. All projects funded under this topic are strongly encouraged to connect, coordinate, and participate in networking, intercomparison and joint activities, to exploit synergies and maximise complementarities. They should also envisage clustering activities with other relevant projects (in [2] and outside of Horizon Europe) for cross-projects cooperation and exchange of results. Proposals should earmark the necessary resources for these purposes. This topic is a Societal-Readiness pilot: Proposals should follow the instructions applying to the Societal readiness pilot, as described in the introduction of the Horizon Europe Main Work Programme 2025 for Climate, Energy and Mobility. They entail the use of an interdisciplinary approach to deepening consideration and responsiveness of research and innovation activities to societal needs and concerns. This topic requires effective contribution of the relevant SSH expertise, including the involvement of SSH experts in the consortium, to meaningfully support Societal Readiness. Specifically, SSH expertise is expected to enable the design of project objectives with Societal Readiness related activities. Consortia should mobilise a variety of SSH research backgrounds, in particular equity, poverty, and gender experts. [1] The evaluation will follow the standard Horizon Europe evaluation criteria, regardless of the number of the aspects covered. [2] For example, relevant projects funded under the calls of Horizon Europe Cluster 5 on Climate sciences and responses and Cluster 2 on Innovative research on social and economic transformations.

CONDICOES DE ELEGIBILIDADE:
"> General conditions 1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes. Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System. As per Work Programme provision on exceptional page limits to proposals/applications, the page limit of the application for this specific topic, is extended by two pages (from 50 to 52 pages) to properly address Societal Readiness-related issues. 2. Eligible Countries described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes. A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide . 3. Other Eligible Conditions The consortium must include as beneficiary or associated partner at least three independent legal entities established in three different low or middle-income countries[[ https://datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519-world-bank-country-and-lending-groups ; standard Horizon Europe funding rules apply - only participants from some of these countries are automatically eligible for funding]]. described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes. 4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes. 5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds are described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes. 5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual . 5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes. 6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants Eligible costs will take the form of a lump sum as defined in the Decision of 7 July 2021 authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (2021-2027) – and in actions under the Research and Training Programme of the European Atomic Energy Community (2021-2025). [[This decision is available on the Funding and Tenders Portal, in the reference documents section for Horizon Europe, under ‘Simplified costs decisions’ or through this link: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/docs/2021-2027/horizon/guidance/ls-decision_he_en.pdf ]]. described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes. Specific conditions described in the specific topic of the Work Programme Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA): Application form templates — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System Standard application form (HE RIA, IA) Standard application form (HE RIA IA Stage 1) &#xa0; Standard application form (HE CSA) &#xa0; Standard application form (HE CSA Stage 1) &#xa0; Standard application form (HE RI) &#xa0; Standard application form (HE COFUND) &#xa0; Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations &#xa0; Standard evaluation form (HE RIA, IA) &#xa0; Standard evaluation form (HE CSA) &#xa0; Standard evaluation form (HE RIA, IA and CSA Stage 1) &#xa0; Standard evaluation form (HE COFUND) &#xa0; Guidance HE Programme Guide &#xa0; Model Grant Agreements (MGA) HE MGA &#xa0; HE Unit MGA &#xa0; Lump Sum MGA &#xa0; Operating Grants MGA &#xa0; Framework Partnership Agreement FPA &#xa0; Call-specific instructions &#xa0; Detailed budget table (HE LS) &#xa0; Information on financial support to third parties (HE) &#xa0; Information on clinical studies (HE) &#xa0; Guidance: "Lump sums - what do I need to know?" Additional documents: HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 1. General Introduction HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 2. Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 3. Research Infrastructures HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 4. Health HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 5. Culture, creativity and inclusive society HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 6. Civil Security for Society HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 7. Digital, Industry and Space HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 8. Climate, Energy and Mobility &#xa0; HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 9. Food, Bioeconomy, Natural Resources, Agriculture and Environment &#xa0; HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 10. European Innovation Ecosystems (EIE) &#xa0; HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 11. Widening participation and strengthening the European Research Area &#xa0; HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 12. Missions &#xa0; HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 13. General Annexes &#xa0; HE Programme Guide &#xa0; HE Framework Programme 2021/695 &#xa0; HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764 &#xa0; EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509 Decision authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment &#xa0; EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement &#xa0; Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual &#xa0; Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions &#xa0; Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement

INFORMACAO DE SUPORTE:
Online Manual is your guide on the procedures from proposal submission to managing your grant. Horizon Europe Programme Guide contains the detailed guidance to the structure, budget and political priorities of Horizon Europe. Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – find the answers to most frequently asked questions on submission of proposals, evaluation and grant management. Research Enquiry Service – ask questions about any aspect of European research in general and the EU Research Framework Programmes in particular. National Contact Points (NCPs) – get guidance, practical information and assistance on participation in Horizon Europe. There are also NCPs in many non-EU and non-associated countries (‘third-countries’). Enterprise Europe Network – contact your EEN national contact for advice to businesses with special focus on SMEs. The support includes guidance on the EU research funding. IT Helpdesk – contact the Funding & Tenders Portal IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc. European IPR Helpdesk assists you on intellectual property issues. CEN-CENELEC Research Helpdesk and ETSI Research Helpdesk – the European Standards Organisations advise you how to tackle standardisation in your project proposal. The European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for their recruitment – consult the general principles and requirements specifying the roles, responsibilities and entitlements of researchers, employers and funders of researchers. Partner Search help you find a partner organisation for your proposal.
