TITLE: Reducing soil sealing through sustainable urban and territorial design in the New European Bauhaus
IDENTIFIER: HORIZON-NEB-2027-02-NEB-SOIL-01
CALL: HORIZON-NEB-2027-02 - Joint Call between the New European Bauhaus Facility and the Soil Deal for Europe Mission
PROGRAMME: Horizon Europe (HORIZON)
PUBLICATION DATE: 2025-12-12

BUDGET OVERVIEW:
  - 113230 | year  | budget  | projects expected 
MGA TYPES: HORIZON Action Grant Budget-Based
PROGRAMME DIVISION: Civil Security for Society > Food, Bioeconomy Natural Resources, Agriculture and Environment > Culture, creativity and inclusive society > Health > Digital, Industry and Space > Climate, Energy and Mobility > Global Challenges and European Industrial Competitiveness > Horizon Europe (HORIZON)

KEYWORDS: Biodiversity conservation, Environment, resources and sustainability, Nature-based solutions, Participatory/Participation, RESILIENCE, Social Sciences and Humanities, Social sciences, interdisciplinary, Soil protection, Urban planning

CONDITIONS:
">

General conditions

1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout

﻿described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes.

Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System.

2. Eligible Countries

described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide.

3. Other Eligible Conditions

described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion

described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds

are described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes

are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual.

5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement

described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes.

6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants

described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes.

Specific conditions
 
described in the [specific topic of the Work Programme]

Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA):
 
Application form templates — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System

Standard application form (HE RIA, IA)

Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations 

Standard evaluation form (HE RIA, IA) 

Guidance

HE Programme Guide 

Model Grant Agreements (MGA)

HE MGA 

Additional documents:
 
HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 1. General Introduction

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 13. New European Bauhaus Facility (NEB)

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 15. General Annexes

HE Programme Guide

HE Framework Programme 2021/695

HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764

EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509

Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment

EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement

Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual 

Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions 

Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement


DESCRIPTION:
Expected Outcome:

Projects results are expected to contribute to all of the following expected outcomes:

 - Increased number of innovative and regenerative[1] planning and spatial design solutions that apply the New European Bauhaus (NEB) principles of sustainability, aesthetics[2], and inclusivity[1] to reduce soil sealing and land take, improve soil health, support food systems transformation, and strengthen climate resilience and biodiversity are available.

 - Increased adoption, upscaling and market uptake of these solutions across diverse territorial contexts (urban, peri-urban, and rural) to enhance soil health, and benefit local communities.

 - Effective funding models and enabling policy frameworks to support territorial transformation. 
 
Scope:

Reducing soil sealing and land take is a critical challenge for climate and water resilience, ecosystem health, biodiversity, food systems transformation, and the livability of human settlements. As urbanisation and infrastructure development expand across Europe’s urban, peri-urban, and rural areas, healthy soils are increasingly sealed, contributing to the loss of vital ecosystem services and biodiversity and increased vulnerability to climate change impacts. Despite growing awareness, there is a lack of integrated and scalable solutions to address these challenges through spatial design and planning. There is a pressing need for solutions that apply the New European Bauhaus (NEB) principles of sustainability, aesthetics, and inclusivity to develop holistic approaches that restore soil function while enabling regenerative and inclusive territorial development.

Proposals are expected to address all of the following:

 - Develop innovative, regenerative and place-based planning and spatial design solutions that prevent soil sealing or promote the unsealing of currently sealed soils, improve soil health, support food systems transformation and enhance climate resilience and biodiversity (e.g., by mitigating urban heat islands and improving water management). These solutions should integrate nature-based[4], human-centred and regenerative approaches (e.g., ecosystem restoration, permeable pavements, green roofs, shared and community[1] gardens, or urban agriculture);

 - Demonstrate each one of these solutions developed in at least three neighbourhoods (i.e. at least one in urban area, one in peri-urban and one in rural area) located in different Member States and/or Associated Countries;

 - Develop plans for the upscale of the solutions developed;

 - Implement participatory[1] and co-creation[1] processes as well as cross-sector collaboration with different stakeholders (e.g., artists, architects, startups, engineers, planners and territorial managers, local authorities, NGOs, researchers, citizens and communities) to integrate creative, scientific, and local knowledge[1] in the design of the proposed solutions;

 - Ensure the transferability of successful solutions across diverse territorial contexts (urban, peri-urban, and rural) in EU Member States and Associated Countries by fostering knowledge exchange and building capacity for broader adoption;

 - Monitor and evaluate the impacts of the proposed solutions using well-defined indicators on soil health and soil sealing, and urban healthy city indicators (e.g., those in line with the Nature Restoration Regulation and those developed by the World Health Organization, WHO). Ensure that data collected informs policy and future scaling efforts;

 - Develop innovative funding models to mobilize financing opportunities, and engage investors and businesses to support the long-term sustainability and replicability of implemented solutions;

 - Support policy uptake and market deployment by translating project results into actionable recommendations aligned with relevant EU strategies, and by fostering dialogue with decision-makers on their broader institutional and regulatory adoption.
 
Projects will contribute to key EU initiatives including the European Green Deal, the Nature Restoration Regulation, the EU Vision for Agriculture and Food, the EU Soil Strategy for 2030 and its goal of achieving zero net land take by 2050 (including implementation of the Soil Monitoring and Resilience Directive), as well as the EU Startup and Scaleup Strategy. Activities under this topic will help to progress towards the objectives of the NEB Facility and the Mission ‘A Soil Deal for Europe’, in particular towards its specific objective 3 ‘No net soil sealing and increase the reuse of urban soils’.

Proposals are expected to follow a participatory, multi-actor and transdisciplinary approach[1] through the integration of different actors and disciplines.

Proposals should include an effective contribution from social sciences, humanities and arts (SSHA) disciplines and experts in order to produce meaningful and significant effects enhancing the societal impact of the related activities.

Proposals are encouraged to connect with projects funded under the Mission ‘A Soil Deal for Europe’ particularly those working in living labs in urban areas (URSOILL) and those developing soil-inclusive spatial planning strategies (SPADES) to ensure solutions are tested in real-life contexts and aligned with place-based experimentation and citizen engagement. Projects are expected to collaborate with the Mission Soil Platform. In addition, collaboration and synergies with the Mission “100 Climate-Neutral and Smart Cities” is highly encouraged if activities are established within one or more of the cities nominated as part of that EU Mission. Where relevant, projects should also explore complementary synergies with ongoing Horizon Europe projects, such as Cleverfood, which is developing a Food 2030 Connected Lab Network of living labs. This topic implements the NEB Facility. Projects are thus expected to contribute to the New European Bauhaus initiative and share their intermediate and final results and findings with the Horizon Europe-funded 'New European Bauhaus hub for results and impact'.

This action supports the follow-up to the July 2023 Communication on EU Missions assessment.

null

Activities are expected to achieve TRL 6-8 by the end of the project – see General Annex B.

[1] See definition in the Glossary section of the NEB part of the HE WP26-27.

[2] See definition of "beautiful” in the Glossary section of the NEB part of the HE WP26-27.

[3] See definition in the Glossary section of the NEB part of the HE WP26-27.

[4] See definition ‘nature-based solutions’ in the Glossary section of the NEB part of the HE WP26-27.

[5] See definition in the Glossary section of the NEB part of the HE WP26-27.

[6] See definition in the Glossary section of the NEB part of the HE WP26-27.

[7] See definition in the Glossary section of the NEB part of the HE WP26-27.

[8] See definition in the Glossary section of the NEB part of the HE WP26-27.

[9] See definition in the Glossary section of the NEB part of the HE WP26-27.


SUPPORT INFO:
Online Manual is your guide on the procedures from proposal submission to managing your grant.

Horizon Europe Programme Guide contains the detailed guidance to the structure, budget and political priorities of Horizon Europe.

Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – find the answers to most frequently asked questions on submission of proposals, evaluation and grant management.

Research Enquiry Service – ask questions about any aspect of European research in general and the EU Research Framework Programmes in particular.

National Contact Points (NCPs) – get guidance, practical information and assistance on participation in Horizon Europe. There are also NCPs in many non-EU and non-associated countries (‘third-countries’).

Enterprise Europe Network – contact your EEN national contact for advice to businesses with special focus on SMEs. The support includes guidance on the EU research funding.

IT Helpdesk – contact the Funding & Tenders Portal IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc.

European IPR Helpdesk assists you on intellectual property issues.

CEN-CENELEC Research Helpdesk and ETSI Research Helpdesk – the European Standards Organisations advise you how to tackle standardisation in your project proposal.

The European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for their recruitment – consult the general principles and requirements specifying the roles, responsibilities and entitlements of researchers, employers and funders of researchers.

Partner Search help you find a partner organisation for your proposal.
