Title: Demand-side 3C pilot demonstrators on converged Telco Edge Cloud Infrastructure (IA)
Topic ID: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04-DATA-08
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04 - DIGITAL
Programme: 
Programme division: 
Publication date: 2025-12-12
SME flag: null
Tags: 3C Network, AI integration, Open Orchestration Platform, Open internet stack, Smart Mobility, Telco Edge Cloud, data governance
Keywords: Communication engineering and systems telecommunications

=== ACTIONS ===
- status=Forthcoming | type=HORIZON-IA HORIZON Innovation Actions | MGA=HORIZON-AG

=== BUDGET / DEADLINES ===
Action: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04-DATA-09 - HORIZON-IA HORIZON Innovation Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 39,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-18 | expectedGrants: 3 | min EUR 10000000 | max EUR 10000000
Action: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04-HUMAN-02 - HORIZON-CSA HORIZON Coordination and Support Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 3,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-18 | expectedGrants: 1 | min EUR 3000000 | max EUR 3000000
Action: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04-DIGITAL-EMERGING-06 - HORIZON-IA HORIZON Innovation Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 3,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-18 | expectedGrants: 2 | min EUR 1500000 | max EUR 1500000
Action: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04-HUMAN-01 - HORIZON-RIA HORIZON  Research and Innovation Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 39,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-18 | expectedGrants: 8 | min EUR 4800000 | max EUR 5600000
Action: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04-HUMAN-07 - HORIZON-CSA HORIZON Coordination and Support Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 7,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-18 | expectedGrants: 1 | min EUR 7000000 | max EUR 7000000
Action: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04-DIGITAL-EMERGING-04 - HORIZON-RIA HORIZON  Research and Innovation Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 42,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-18 | expectedGrants: 3 | min EUR 14000000 | max EUR 14000000
Action: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04-DIGITAL-EMERGING-05 - HORIZON-IA HORIZON Innovation Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 18,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-18 | expectedGrants: 1 | min EUR 18000000 | max EUR 18000000
Action: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04-DATA-08 - HORIZON-IA HORIZON Innovation Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 38,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-18 | expectedGrants: 2 | min EUR 19000000 | max EUR 19000000
Action: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04-DATA-03 - HORIZON-RIA HORIZON  Research and Innovation Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 35,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-18 | expectedGrants: 2 | min EUR 17500000 | max EUR 17500000
Action: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04-DIGITAL-EMERGING-10 - HORIZON-CSA HORIZON Coordination and Support Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 4,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-18 | expectedGrants: 1 | min EUR 4000000 | max EUR 4000000
Action: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04-DIGITAL-EMERGING-11 - HORIZON-RIA HORIZON  Research and Innovation Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 44,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-18 | expectedGrants: 1 | min EUR 44000000 | max EUR 44000000

=== DESCRIPTION ===
Expected Outcome: Demand-side driven validation of open orchestration platforms across the telco-cloud edge continuum unlocking notably the transformative value of AI for European businesses, driving business growth in multiple industries strategic for Europe. Enabling the path towards sustainability and competitiveness of key vertical sectors in the EU, exploiting the innovative features of 3C/ telco-edge-cloud, including network features such as API (Application Program Interface) aggregation, slicing, automation, latency, security, ISAC (Integrated Sensing and Communication), reconfigurability, to significantly improve quality of service, resilience, sustainability and other performance parameters of digital communications. The demand pilots will have a clear sector relevance, with one pilot addressing the future of smart mobility including the automotive sector. A vibrant ecosystem around 3C/telco-edge-cloud infrastructure, targeting SMEs and start-ups to develop innovative services and new business models validation and marketplace exploitation strategies, as well as paths to commercialization or replicability. Scope: The term “Connected, Collaborative, Computing (3C) Network” refers to a telco-edge-cloud, secure multi-provider and multi-technology, communication system that hosts network functions and workloads for and beyond connectivity (e.g. 6G, AI Storage/Compute, networking, Security ISAC , and any other application or capability) as a service (aaS). Key features of the 3C/ telco-edge-cloud network include programmability, fast service creation, security and privacy, mobility, and service continuity across inter-domain deployments. 3C/ telco-edge-cloud networks enable innovative use cases for an EU Digital Market that integrate communication, collaboration and computing capabilities in competitive and sustainable business models that will reinforce EU competitiveness and contribute to digital sovereignty, in particular through the use of Open Internet Stack components. Resulting solutions should be available for use in the public sector (for instance for justice systems). The 3C Network large-scale pilot funded under topic HORIZON-CL4-2025-03-DATA-08: Large-scale pilots for supply end-to-end infrastructures integrating device, network computing and communication capabilities for Telco Edge Cloud deployments, as a basis for Connected Collaborative Computing Networks (3C networks) (RIA) is setting up end-to-end integrated infrastructures and platforms, bringing together players from different segments of the connectivity and compute value chain and beyond. The main target is to research and validate the integration of device, network, cloud and edge computing, and communication capabilities for telco edge cloud deployments to realize a ubiquitous mesh of computing and communication resources. As a main outcome the supply side pilot establishes an open orchestration platform across the telco-cloud-edge continuum, exploits the transformative value of AI and builds on the integration of solutions developed by the Open Euro Stack. Demand- side pilot demonstrators called in this topic will build on the above supply side large-scale pilot and integrate future domain-specific applications and services with an emerging European 3Cs/ telco-edge-cloud infrastructure, leveraging different network features. Key features will include security and privacy solutions offering resistance to emerging quantum threats (such as via post-quantum cryptography), mobility, and service continuity across inter-domain and multi-cloud deployments and ecosystems. Up to two pilot demonstrators on below listed specific verticals are expected . One pilot demonstrator focusing on Mobility covering specific areas of transport, logistics and the Automotive industry. The pilot should support the strategy as developed by the Connected and Autonomous Vehicle Alliance identified in the Automotive Action plan , in particular Pillars 3 (AI models) and 5 (Large-scale testing), which will be launched in 2025. One pilot demonstrator focusing on another vertical sector such as energy, smart communities, industrial virtual worlds, health, agrifood or manufacturing. They would be driven by a consortium including partners both from the demand (user) and infrastructure supply side. The pilot demonstrators should take advantage of open application interfaces, explore the possibilities of AI, “virtual worlds”, and other innovative technologies for practical implementation in the referred vertical domains. They should leverage combined investments in network infrastructure, computing and connectivity infrastructure as an enabler for more extensive set of digital innovation, with cognitive cloud computing and swarm intelligence, generative AI and LLM, as well as on-boarding of XR/AR technologies, being ranked most important. Proposals are expected to detail a robust data governance model for the data generated and processed within the pilots. This model should address data sovereignty, interoperability with Common European Data Spaces, and alignment with principles from initiatives like Gaia-X. It should outline clear mechanisms for secure and compliant data sharing between the demand-side (users) and supply-side (infrastructure providers), establishing the trust necessary for a functional data economy on top of the 3C infrastructure. Pilot demonstrators should demonstrate the evolution from virtualised and cloud-native network functions towards automated network operations enabling agile and green IoT-edge computing solutions and decentralised intelligence. They should also demonstrate benefits for infrastructure providers to operate networks more efficiently and move beyond traditional connectivity-service models to higher value-added services. Demonstrations will respond to the ever more demanding processing power of AI through integration on-device level and changes triggered by GenAI affecting global communication infrastructures. Orchestration of workloads across the telco-cloud-edge continuum from distributed sensors and actuators to the edge and cloud is a crucial part of innovation as AI becomes more resource-intensive. The pilot demonstrators should take into consideration the recommendations on user requirements from the advisory group of end users, as well as liaise with the collaboration and support action (CSA) funded under WP25 to bridge between the 3C/ telco-edge-cloud supply pilot funded under WP25 and the demand pilots funded under WP26-27. The pilots should exploit in particular open APIs and open-source components as developed by the supply side pilot, e.g. including the use of capabilities to implement specific communication management services (e.g. Open RAN security, RIC VNF…), up-take of existing standards and relevant open-source projects (e.g., Sylva, ANUKET, Nephio, CAMARA, etc.). The pilot demonstrators should include testing, validation and demonstration of prototypes of agile virtualised network functions combined with ubiquitous mesh of integrated devices, computing and communication resources in operational environments, ensuring security and privacy, protection also in the face of emerging quantum threats, energy efficiency, transparency and control of the ecological footprint, as well as sustainable artificial intelligence services. The pilot demonstrators are expected to re-use as far as possible existing open-source frameworks, i.e. open-source software governed by communities of contributors, that will provide key technology components for the operation of the 3C/ telco-edge-cloud supply-side large scale pilot. These open-source frameworks should be made available to the Open Internet Stack Support for Scale. The proposals should ensure a high degree of participation of stakeholders from the relevant vertical sectors, with a particular attention to the involvement of SMEs, scale-ups and start-ups. The pilots should establish a high degree of relations and collaborate with complementary EU funded research activities, like the Smart Networks and Systems Joint Undertaking (SNS JU) projects, the “Empowering AI across the continuum” and the “Sovereign edge/cloud infrastructure” R&I areas, the PPP virtual worlds, CCAM partnership as well as support of SW-defined vehicle initiative under the Chips JU. null Activities are expected to achieve TRL 6-8 by the end of the project – see General Annex B.

=== CONDITIONS ===
"> General conditions 1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes. Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System. 2. Eligible Countries described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes. A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide . 3. Other Eligible Conditions In order to achieve the expected outcomes, and safeguard the Union’s strategic assets, interests, autonomy, and security, it is important to avoid a situation of technological dependency on a non-EU source, in a global context that requires the EU to take action to build on its strengths, and to carefully assess and address any strategic weaknesses, vulnerabilities and high-risk dependencies which put at risk the attainment of its ambitions. For this reason, participation is limited to legal entities established in Member States, Iceland and Norway and the following additional associated countries: Canada, Israel, Republic of Korea, New Zealand, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. In addition, entities established in third countries which may become associated to Horizon Europe during 2026 and 2027 may be eligible to participate in this topic if the third country is identified for this topic as an eligible country in the List of Participating Countries in Horizon Europe at the time of submission of the application[[See the List of Participating Countries in Horizon Europe available at https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/docs/2021-2027/common/guidance/list-3rd-country-participation_horizon-euratom_en.pdf.]]. In any case, the association agreement to the Programme must apply by the time of the signature of the grant agreement. For the duly justified and exceptional reasons listed in the paragraph above, in order to guarantee the protection of the strategic interests of the Union and its Member States, entities established in an eligible country listed above, but which are directly or indirectly controlled by a non-eligible country or by a non-eligible country entity, may not participate in the action unless it can be demonstrated, by means of guarantees positively assessed by their eligible country of establishment, that their participation to the action would not negatively impact the Union’s strategic assets, interests, autonomy, or security. Entities assessed as high-risk suppliers of mobile network communication equipment within the meaning of ‘restrictions for the protection of European communication networks’ (or entities fully or partially owned or controlled by a high-risk supplier) cannot submit guarantees.[[ The guarantees shall in particular substantiate that, for the purpose of the action, measures are in place to ensure that: a) control over the applicant legal entity is not exercised in a manner that retrains or restricts its ability to carry out the action and to deliver results, that imposes restrictions concerning its infrastructure, facilities, assets, resources, intellectual property or know-how needed for the purpose of the action, or that undermines its capabilities and standards necessary to carry out the action; b) access by a non-eligible country or by a non-eligible country entity to sensitive information relating to the action is prevented; and the employees or other persons involved in the action have a national security clearance issued by an eligible country, where appropriate; c) ownership of the intellectual property arising from, and the results of, the action remain within the recipient during and after completion of the action, are not subject to control or restrictions by non-eligible countries or non-eligible country entity, and are not exported outside the eligible countries, nor is access to them from outside the eligible countries granted, without the approval of the eligible country in which the legal entity is established.]] Described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes. 4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes. 5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds are described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes. 5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual . 5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes. 6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes. Specific conditions described in the [specific topic of the Work Programme] Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA): Application form templates — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System Standard application form (HE RIA, IA) Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations Standard evaluation form (HE RIA, IA) Guidance HE Programme Guide &#xa0; Model Grant Agreements (MGA) HE MGA &#xa0; Call-specific instructions &#xa0; Ownership Control Declaration Annex Additional documents: HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 1. General Introduction HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 7. Digital, Industry and Space HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 15. General Annexes HE Programme Guide HE Framework Programme 2021/695 HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764 EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509 Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions &#xa0; Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement Guidance on participation in EU calls with ownership and control restrictions

=== SUPPORT INFO ===
Online Manual is your guide on the procedures from proposal submission to managing your grant. Horizon Europe Programme Guide contains the detailed guidance to the structure, budget and political priorities of Horizon Europe. Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – find the answers to most frequently asked questions on submission of proposals, evaluation and grant management. Research Enquiry Service – ask questions about any aspect of European research in general and the EU Research Framework Programmes in particular. National Contact Points (NCPs) – get guidance, practical information and assistance on participation in Horizon Europe. There are also NCPs in many non-EU and non-associated countries (‘third-countries’). Enterprise Europe Network – contact your EEN national contact for advice to businesses with special focus on SMEs. The support includes guidance on the EU research funding. IT Helpdesk – contact the Funding & Tenders Portal IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc. European IPR Helpdesk assists you on intellectual property issues. CEN-CENELEC Research Helpdesk and ETSI Research Helpdesk – the European Standards Organisations advise you how to tackle standardisation in your project proposal. The European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for their recruitment – consult the general principles and requirements specifying the roles, responsibilities and entitlements of researchers, employers and funders of researchers. Partner Search help you find a partner organisation for your proposal.