Startup Europe
==============

Topic identifier: HORIZON-EIE-2027-01-CONNECT-01
Call identifier: HORIZON-EIE-2027-01
Call title: Interconnected Innovation Ecosystems (2027.1)
Publication date: 2025-12-12
Deadline: 1820966400000
Keywords: Business development, Business support services, Entrepreneurship, Incubator companies, Innovation support services, Market development, Market-creating innovation, New business opportunities, Start-up companies, Technology development

--- DESCRIPTION ---

Expected Outcome:

Project results are expected to contribute to the following outcomes:

- Increasing the market footprint of European startups in strategic digital technologies and deep tech[1] innovation, including but not limited to Artificial Intelligence, Advanced Computing, Cybersecurity, Next Generation Internet, Blockchain, Internet of Things, Metaverse, Energy, Greentech, AgriTech, and Fintech;
- Better connection of startups and scaleups, including European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT) and European Innovation Council (EIC)-supported startups and Seal of Excellence holders, to relevant local and/or European ecosystems, communities, and potential new markets;
- A scaling up of capabilities in matching technology solutions developed by highly innovative European Union (EU)-funded digital and deep tech startups with investment and growth opportunities in collaboration with other initiatives such as: the EIC, the EIT and the Knowledge and Innovation Communities (KICs), InvestEU, the Digital Europe Programme, Women TechEU, public and private buyers, or investors and corporate innovation ventures. 
In pursuit of the above outcomes the projects are expected to prioritise:

- Startups and scaleups that have already achieved market-product fit or scale ups that have raised at least a round of financing (seed or later); and
- Startups and scaleups established in ‘moderate’ or ‘emerging’ innovator countries and/or regions; or
- Women-led startups and scaleups[2]. 
Scope:

This action will connect local digital, deep tech, and manufacturing startup and scaleup ecosystems and support cross-border acceleration activities for startups and scaleups that demonstrate traction (i.e. market-product fit or at least a seed round raised). Among the startup and scaleup ecosystems to be connected, specific attention will be given to the inclusion of ecosystems in ‘moderate’ or ‘emerging’ innovator countries and/or regions.

While cross-border acceleration activities are open to all European startups and scaleups demonstrating traction, the action targets companies identified in Horizon Europe (e.g. though the EIC, including the EIC Scaleup 100 action, EIT-supported companies and companies supported through Regional Innovation Valleys) and the Digital Europe Programme (e.g. from European Digital Innovation Hubs), and the use of Innovation Radar intelligence[3] and other relevant data set[4]. Targeting of companies funded by national programmes, particularly those part of “Plug-in” certified programmes (see EIC Work Programme 2025 Annex 4) should also be considered.

In terms of outreach and amplification, actions should be publicised where relevant in the EIC Community[5] and should actively engage with activities and events of the Europe Startup Nations Alliance[6]. Special attention will be given to support European digital and deep tech startups and scaleups in accessing innovation procurement opportunities (public or corporate procurers).

The action may be implemented through financial support to third parties or directly by the consortium partners to allow companies to best benefit from the services described above. For consortia opting for the financial support to third parties scheme, the monitoring of the support to third parties provided for each action, as well as the management of the financial support to third parties, will be ensured by the coordinator.

The actions implemented must ensure that the companies that excel in technology get appropriate support to also thrive in product-market-fit, financial alignment, business model and revenue generation, team dynamics and leadership, and adaptability to external factors including regulatory challenges, industry trends, market changes and other factors to make them investment-ready.

The applicants should put in place proper communication and publicity of the actions engaged, including success stories of funded companies and case studies about the impact of the project.

The projects should monitor the development of supported startups and scaleups with relevant indicators. For this purpose, consortium partners should ensure the monitoring of supported companies for three years after the end of the project with a robust set of indicators including: (1) average percentage evolution in revenue of supported companies; (2) percentage of supported companies securing follow-on funding; (3) amount of follow-on funding secured; (4) average profitability of supported companies; (5) market share evolution of supported companies; (6) survival rate of supported companies (6, 12, 18 months after end of support for startups, and 1, 2, 3 years for scaleups).

[1] Deep tech is a technology that is based on cutting-edge scientific advances and discoveries and is characterised by the need to stay at the technological forefront by constant interaction with new ideas and results from the lab. Deep tech innovations are understood to be those that have the potential to deliver transformative solutions, rooted in cutting-edge science, technology and engineering, including innovation that combines advances in the physical, biological and digital spheres. Deep tech is distinct from ‘high tech’ which tends to refer only to R&D intensity.

[2] Startups founded, or co-founded by women, holding a top management position (chief executive officer (CEO), chief technology officer (CTO), or chief scientific officer (CSO) or equivalent).

[3] The EU Innovation Radar Platform (Actions can also have Application Programming Interface (API) access to the Innovation Radar data sets).More information under The EIC Community.

[4] Including the work of the Joint Research Centre in the areas of innovative Startups and scale-ups with high growth potential. More information under “New European Alliance to accelerate startups growth.”

[5] More information under The EIC Community.

[6] Including the work of the Joint Research Centre in the areas of innovative Startups and scale-ups with high growth potential. More information under New European Alliance to accelerate startups growth

--- CONDITIONS ---

General conditions

1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout

﻿described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes.

Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System.

2. Eligible Countries

described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide.

3. Other Eligible Conditions

At least 50% of the beneficiaries in a consortium must be established in 'moderate' or ‘emerging’ innovator countries or regions.

The Regional Innovation Scoreboard is taken as a reference, and in the case of entities representing national authorities, the European Innovation Scoreboard. The applicants must use as a reference the latest version of the documents mentioned above at the time of the call opening. Associated Countries which are not included in the European Innovation Scoreboard and are ranked below 25 on the Global Innovation Index 2024 are considered as ‘moderate’ or ‘emerging' innovators. In cases of Associated Countries not included in any of the previously mentioned references, the participation rank of the country in the Horizon Europe programme (Horizon Europe country profile) will be taken as a reference and countries ranked below the average will be considered as ‘moderate’ or ‘emerging' innovators.

Subject to restrictions for the protection of European communication networks.

described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion

described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds

are described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes

are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual.

5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement

described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes.

6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants

Eligible costs will take the form of a lump sum as defined in the Decision of 7 July 2021 authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (2021-2027) – and in actions under the Research and Training Programme of the European Atomic Energy Community (2021-2025) [[This decision is available on the Funding and Tenders Portal, in the reference documents section for Horizon Europe, under ‘Simplified costs decisions’ or through this link: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/docs/2021-2027/horizon/guidance/ls-decision_he_en.pdf]].

Beneficiaries may provide financial support to third parties. The support to third parties can only be provided in the form of grants. The maximum amount to be granted to each third party is EUR 60 000.

described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes.

Specific conditions
 

described in the [specific topic of the Work Programme]

Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA):
 

Application form templates — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System

Standard application form (HE CSA) 

Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations 

Standard evaluation form (HE CSA) 

Guidance

HE Programme Guide 

Model Grant Agreements (MGA)

Lump Sum MGA 

Call-specific instructions 

Detailed budget table (HE LS) 

Information on financial support to third parties (HE) 

Guidance: "Lump sums - what do I need to know?"

Additional documents:
 

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 1. General Introduction

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 10. European Innovation Ecosystems (EIE)

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 15. General Annexes

HE Programme Guide

HE Framework Programme 2021/695

HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764

EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509

Decision authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme

Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment

EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement 

Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual 

Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions 

Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement

--- SUPPORT INFO ---

Online Manual is your guide on the procedures from proposal submission to managing your grant.

Horizon Europe Programme Guide contains the detailed guidance to the structure, budget and political priorities of Horizon Europe.

Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – find the answers to most frequently asked questions on submission of proposals, evaluation and grant management.

Research Enquiry Service – ask questions about any aspect of European research in general and the EU Research Framework Programmes in particular.

National Contact Points (NCPs) – get guidance, practical information and assistance on participation in Horizon Europe. There are also NCPs in many non-EU and non-associated countries (‘third-countries’).

Enterprise Europe Network – contact your EEN national contact for advice to businesses with special focus on SMEs. The support includes guidance on the EU research funding.

IT Helpdesk – contact the Funding & Tenders Portal IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc.

European IPR Helpdesk assists you on intellectual property issues.

CEN-CENELEC Research Helpdesk and ETSI Research Helpdesk – the European Standards Organisations advise you how to tackle standardisation in your project proposal.

The European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for their recruitment – consult the general principles and requirements specifying the roles, responsibilities and entitlements of researchers, employers and funders of researchers.

Partner Search help you find a partner organisation for your proposal.