TOPIC: HORIZON-CL5-2027-03-D5-15
TITLE: Prospective evaluation of nuclear power potential for shipping (ZEWT Partnership)
CALL: HORIZON-CL5-2027-03
ACTIONS: [{"status": {"id": 31094501, "abbreviation": "Forthcoming", "description": "Forthcoming"}, "types": [{"typeOfAction": "HORIZON-CSA HORIZON Coordination and Support Actions", "typeOfMGA": [{"id": 43027849, "abbreviation": "HORIZON-AG-LS", "description": "HORIZON Lump Sum Grant"}]}], "plannedOpeningDate": "1797292800000", "submissionProcedure": {}, "deadlineDates": ["1807660800000"]}]

DESCRIPTION:
Expected Outcome: Project results are expected to contribute to all the following expected outcomes: Drafting of a R&I roadmap towards deploying nuclear power in commercial shipping, including small modular reactors (SMRs) and other advanced nuclear technologies (e.g. complementing the latest European Industrial Alliance on SMRs technology roadmap [1] ), including identification of research gaps, infrastructures and future innovation needs Mapping of relevant regulatory regimes nationally, regionally and internationally for the use of nuclear-powered shipping, including recommendations on regulatory frameworks and international cooperation. Development of scenarios for the use of the technology, including potential damage scenarios. The implications for National Energy and Climate Plans and National Air Pollution Control Programmes as well as water pollution policies required by EU legislative framework. Assessment of total cost of ownership for the deployment of current and potential technologies. Development of safety, training and operational guidelines for nuclear-powered ships. Scope: Nuclear propulsion has the potential to reduce emissions of air pollutants and to decarbonize the shipping sector, producing zero GHG tank-to-wake emissions and low upstream well-to-tank emissions. A coordinated effort among various stakeholders including industry partners, research performing organisations, NGOs, the European Commission, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) should help evaluate such prospective potential. It should benefit from the latest Research and Innovation (R&I) results, technical, socio-economic and environment studies, or initiatives being capitalised at EU and international level, to ensure a comprehensive assessment. The main objectives are to assess the feasibility, safety, and environmental impact of using nuclear power for shipping to achieve zero-emission of GHG, air and water pollutants in maritime transport. Following a preliminary assessment and literature review, as well as detailed technical and economic studies regulatory and technical recommendations should be developed, along with a review of on-going pilot projects aimed at demonstrating the feasibility of nuclear-powered vessels. The project should help evaluate the technical, economic, regulatory, environmental and social aspects of deploying nuclear power in commercial shipping, including small modular reactors (SMRs) and other advanced nuclear technologies. Actions should address all the following aspects: Technical Feasibility: a) To assess the suitability of SMRs and other nuclear technologies for maritime use; b) To evaluate any integration challenges with existing and potential new ship designs, including modular designs.; c) To study the lifecycle of nuclear-powered vessels, including construction, operation, and decommissioning. Economic Viability: a) To conduct cost-benefit analyses comparing nuclear-powered shipping to conventional and renewable low and zero-carbon fuel options, taking into account the long-term availability of fuel and the cost of disposal of residues; b) To evaluate infrastructure requirements in the EU, such as port facilities for nuclear vessels; c) Mapping full costs for a nuclear propelled ship on a life cycle basis. Safety and Security: a) To develop safety protocols for nuclear-powered ships, including emergency response and accident mitigation; b) To address cybersecurity risks, external threats and proliferation concerns and safety in ports. c) Assessing long-term crew training requirements for nuclear operations, safety and security and their implementation in international training and certification regulations. Environmental Impact: a) To analyze the potential reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, air and water pollutants caused by mining, refining, use and disposal of spent nuclear fuel; b) To assess the impact of nuclear waste management, disposal as part of implementation of a circular economy approach; c) To assess the impact of nuclear-powered ships on marine ecosystems addressing in particular water pollutions and by contaminants; d) To analyze possible damage scenarios with a view to liability issues and mitigation of damages. Regulatory and Legal Framework: a) To identify gaps in international maritime law and IAEA nuclear regulations; and b) To propose recommendations related to the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) [2] and other relevant treaties The implications for National Energy and Climate Plans and National Air Pollution Control Programmes required by EU legislative framework. Additionally, a strategy for skills development should be presented, associating social partners and civil society where relevant. Proposals are expected to demonstrate how their objectives contribute to EU added value and long-term competitiveness in nuclear-powered vessel technologies. This includes enhancing the EU’s R&I capacity, safeguarding critical technological know-how, developing skilled human capital, and reinforcing the resilience of the EU’s industrial and manufacturing base in this strategic sector. This topic implements the co-programmed European Partnership on ‘Zero Emission Waterborne Transport’ (ZEWT). As such, projects resulting from this topic will be expected to report on results to the European Partnership ‘Zero Emission Waterborne Transport’ (ZEWT) in support of the monitoring of its KPIs. [1] European Industrial Alliance on Small Modular Reactors, https://single-market-economy.ec.europa.eu/industry/industrial-alliances/european-industrial-alliance-small-modular-reactors_en [2] https://www.imo.org/en/About/Conventions/Pages/International-Convention-for-the-Safety-of-Life-at-Sea-(SOLAS),-1974.aspx

CONDITIONS:
"> General conditions 1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout ﻿ described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes. Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System. 2. Eligible Countries described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes. A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide . 3. Other Eligible Conditions If projects use satellite-based earth observation, positioning, navigation and/or related timing data and services, beneficiaries must make use of Copernicus and/or Galileo/EGNOS (other data and services may additionally be used). Subject to restrictions for the protection of European communication networks. described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes. 4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes. 5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds are described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes. 5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual . 5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes. 6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants The granting authority may, up to 4 years after the end of the action, object to a transfer of ownership or to the exclusive licensing of results, as set out in the specific provision of Annex 5. Eligible costs will take the form of a lump sum as defined in the Decision of 7 July 2021 authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (2021-2027) – and in actions under the Research and Training Programme of the European Atomic Energy Community (2021-2025) [[This decision is available on the Funding and Tenders Portal, in the reference documents section for Horizon Europe, under ‘Simplified costs decisions’ or through this link: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/docs/2021-2027/horizon/guidance/ls-decision_he_en.pdf ]]. described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes. Specific conditions Not applicable. Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA): Application form templates — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System Standard application form (HE CSA) Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations &#xa0; Standard evaluation form (HE CSA) &#xa0; Guidance HE Programme Guide &#xa0; Model Grant Agreements (MGA) Lump Sum MGA &#xa0; Call-specific instructions &#xa0; Detailed budget table (HE LS) &#xa0; Guidance: "Lump sums - what do I need to know?" Additional documents: HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 1. General Introduction HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 8. Climate, Energy and Mobility HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 15. General Annexes HE Programme Guide HE Framework Programme 2021/695 HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764 EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509 Decision authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual &#xa0; Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions &#xa0; Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement