Title: Apply AI: Challenge-Driven AI Innovation Booster in Apply AI prioritised sectors (RIA) (Partnership in AI, Data and Robotics)
Topic ID: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04-DIGITAL-EMERGING-04
Call: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04 - DIGITAL
Programme: 
Programme division: 
Publication date: 2025-12-12
SME flag: null
Tags: Apply AI, Artificial Intelligence, Challenge, Competition, Robotics
Keywords: Artificial intelligence, intelligent systems, multi agent systems

=== ACTIONS ===
- status=Forthcoming | type=HORIZON-RIA HORIZON  Research and Innovation Actions | MGA=HORIZON-AG

=== BUDGET / DEADLINES ===
Action: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04-DATA-09 - HORIZON-IA HORIZON Innovation Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 39,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-18 | expectedGrants: 3 | min EUR 10000000 | max EUR 10000000
Action: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04-HUMAN-02 - HORIZON-CSA HORIZON Coordination and Support Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 3,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-18 | expectedGrants: 1 | min EUR 3000000 | max EUR 3000000
Action: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04-DIGITAL-EMERGING-06 - HORIZON-IA HORIZON Innovation Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 3,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-18 | expectedGrants: 2 | min EUR 1500000 | max EUR 1500000
Action: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04-HUMAN-01 - HORIZON-RIA HORIZON  Research and Innovation Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 39,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-18 | expectedGrants: 8 | min EUR 4800000 | max EUR 5600000
Action: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04-HUMAN-07 - HORIZON-CSA HORIZON Coordination and Support Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 7,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-18 | expectedGrants: 1 | min EUR 7000000 | max EUR 7000000
Action: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04-DIGITAL-EMERGING-04 - HORIZON-RIA HORIZON  Research and Innovation Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 42,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-18 | expectedGrants: 3 | min EUR 14000000 | max EUR 14000000
Action: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04-DIGITAL-EMERGING-05 - HORIZON-IA HORIZON Innovation Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 18,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-18 | expectedGrants: 1 | min EUR 18000000 | max EUR 18000000
Action: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04-DATA-08 - HORIZON-IA HORIZON Innovation Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 38,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-18 | expectedGrants: 2 | min EUR 19000000 | max EUR 19000000
Action: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04-DATA-03 - HORIZON-RIA HORIZON  Research and Innovation Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 35,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-18 | expectedGrants: 2 | min EUR 17500000 | max EUR 17500000
Action: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04-DIGITAL-EMERGING-10 - HORIZON-CSA HORIZON Coordination and Support Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 4,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-18 | expectedGrants: 1 | min EUR 4000000 | max EUR 4000000
Action: HORIZON-CL4-2027-04-DIGITAL-EMERGING-11 - HORIZON-RIA HORIZON  Research and Innovation Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 44,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-18 | expectedGrants: 1 | min EUR 44000000 | max EUR 44000000

=== DESCRIPTION ===
Expected Outcome: The Apply AI Strategy [1] proposes a comprehensive set of measures to notably harness the transformative potential of AI. It lays down targeted measures to boost AI use in key strategic sectors of the EU economy including healthcare, mobility and manufacturing for example. With challenges designed to spark breakthroughs in such strategic sectors, the current topic will directly support key activities of the Apply AI Strategy. Project results are expected to contribute to all of the following expected outcomes: Significant technological progress and innovation in Apply AI Strategy's prioritised sectors driven by challenge-oriented, AI-powered solutions. Increase competitiveness and visibility of the relevant AI community within key application domains, and promote collaborative approaches for AI development in these domains, fostering the ecosystem. Increase adoption of AI technologies across the following three key application domains: healthcare, advanced manufacturing (including AI-powered robotics) and in-vehicle autonomous driving. Scope: The Challenge-Driven AI Innovation Booster aims to drive significant technological progress and innovation in Apply AI prioritised sectors through challenge-oriented, AI-powered solutions. This initiative seeks to boost Europe's developer community and the adoption of powerful, trustworthy AI solutions in three strategic domains such as: In healthcare - advanced AI will accelerate diagnostics and treatment plans, enhance robotic surgery, or improve patient care through predictive analytics. In advanced manufacturing - advanced AI will optimize production processes, improve quality control and product design, or enable predictive maintenance. In autonomous driving - advanced AI will enhance vehicle safety, improve navigation systems, or optimize traffic management. Provided sufficient quality of the proposals received, at least one selected project will focus on in-vehicle autonomous driving applications, in line with the Automotive Action Plan, ensuring coordination with the announced Connected and Autonomous Vehicle Alliance. Each proposal should focus exclusively on one of the three key sectors mentioned above. It is expected to focus primarily on the definition and organization of a multi-stage competition in the chosen sector, as well as on the accompanying support to the SMEs/teams taking part in each of the challenges. User-industry companies from the strategic sector targeted by the proposal should be core partners in each consortium. They should demonstrate a genuine interest in the project results and therefore support the challenge participants to reach the most powerful and exploitable results benefiting their industry. The expected results are pre-competitive, but the proposal must include a draft exploitation plan focused on how the solutions developed by the third parties will be taken up, with support from the user-industry partners for their future exploitation. The consortium leading the project is responsible for the various stages of the challenges. This consortium should provide the necessary support resources during each stage of the competition (including technical assistance and business support to develop an exploitation strategy) and, most importantly, the consortium should ensure that the teams competing for and receiving financial support to third parties have access to relevant data to fine-tune models and build high-impact solutions meeting industry needs. Proposals should be driven by impactful use-cases where advanced AI can make the difference: a number of industries from the targeted sector are expected to join forces to define challenging problems to solve with advanced AI solutions, which then drive the rest of the project. Based on such challenges, each project consortium should organize a multi-staged competition with an increasing level of complexity. In the different stages (see below), third parties, either single SMEs or small teams of organisations led by an SME, compete to address the challenges with advanced AI solutions. For each proposal: Stage 1 - Open call: The consortium launches an open call for proposals. A challenge, open to all, will allow the selection for Stage 2 of the 10 highest-ranked proposals according to a pre-defined selection process and criteria. Each solution is expected to be submitted either by a single SME, developer of advanced AI solutions, or a small team of organizations led by such SME. Stage 2 - Competition among Stage 1 winners: The 10 teams or organisations selected from Stage 1 receive a EUR 300,000 FSTP grant each in accordance with their successfully selected proposal (which addresses the tasks and challenges defined for this stage by the consortium). At the end of Stage 2, the 4 highest-ranked solutions will be selected for the next stage according to a pre-defined selection process and criteria. Stage 3 – Grand finale (Competition among Stage 2 winners): The 4 teams or organisations selected from Stage 2 receive EUR 2,250,000 FSTP grants each in accordance with their successfully selected proposals to address the tasks and challenges for this stage. In conjunction, they will prepare for the grand finale that will identify the best performing solution at the end of Stage 3 according to the evaluation methodology defined by the consortium. The consortium should define measures to support the winners in maximizing the impact and uptake of their solutions. For instance, after the end of the FSTP grant, the best-performing team could be offered the opportunity to conclude partnerships or contracts with the user industries leading the consortium. Measures to support the broad uptake of their solutions in the whole sector should also be considered. Such a multi-staged scheme is expected to be implemented in parallel by the projects funded under this action, each addressing a different sector. Each proposal, involving several major industry players, should define a clear methodology to implement the various steps of the approach, define the specifications of the stages of the competitions, timelines, targets, KPIs, and propose a solid evaluation methodology including evaluation criteria. The main information should be in the proposal, in addition to all mandatory requirements as concerns financial support to third parties. The beneficiaries will also be in charge of implementing the evaluation methodology and providing the necessary infrastructure/technical support for the participants in the challenges. The consortium members are also responsible for ensuring high visibility of the competitions. The projects selected from this call, each addressing one of the three targeted sectors, are expected to collaborate among themselves to make economies of scale in sharing best practices, defining processes for organizing the challenges, ensuring efficient monitoring, organizing dissemination and communication activities, etc. Such collaboration among the linked actions is expected to be formalized by a collaboration agreement after the grant agreement signature. For each proposal, a total of EUR 3,000,000 is foreseen to be distributed among the winners of Stage 1, in the form of FSTP grants, to prepare for Stage 2. In addition, EUR 9,000,000 is foreseen to be distributed among the winners of Stage 2, in the form of FSTP grants, to prepare for Stage 3 of the challenge. The proposal is expected to make the case for such investment in defining the objectives and expected results. This amount will be distributed equally among the 4 winning teams of Stage 2, who are expected to develop further their solutions and compete for Stage 3. Visibility would be important; therefore, dissemination and communication campaigns are key. The proposers are also encouraged to seek sponsorship, which would be key for the visibility and prestige of their challenge and to attract the best developers from the eligible countries to compete, particularly SMEs, alone or within a team competing for the challenges. All proposals are expected to incorporate mechanisms for assessing and demonstrating progress, including qualitative and quantitative KPIs, benchmarking, and progress monitoring. When possible, proposals should build on and reuse public results from relevant previous funded actions. Communicable results should be shared with the European R&D community through the AI-on-demand platform and, if necessary, other relevant digital resource platforms to bolster the European AI, Data, and Robotics ecosystem by disseminating results and best practices. This topic implements the co-programmed European Partnership on AI, data, and robotics (ADRA), and all proposals are expected to allocate tasks for cohesion activities with ADRA and the CSA HORIZON-CL4-2025-03-HUMAN-18: GenAI4EU central Hub. Proposals should also build on or seek collaboration with relevant projects and develop synergies with other relevant International, European, national, or regional initiatives. Projects selected in this topic will link to the resources offered by the AI Factories, including the Data Labs. The results may be validated in the Testing and Experiment Facilities and further deployed via the European Digital Innovation Hubs (EDIHs) and will contribute to the Apply AI strategy. null Activities are expected to start at TRL 2 and achieve TRL 5 by the end of the project – see General Annex B. [1] COM(2025) 723 Apply AI Strategy

=== CONDITIONS ===
"> General conditions 1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes. Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System. 2. Eligible Countries described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes. A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide . 3. Other Eligible Conditions In order to achieve the expected outcomes, and safeguard the Union’s strategic assets, interests, autonomy, and security, it is important to avoid a situation of technological dependency on a non-EU source, in a global context that requires the EU to take action to build on its strengths, and to carefully assess and address any strategic weaknesses, vulnerabilities and high-risk dependencies which put at risk the attainment of its ambitions. For this reason, participation is limited to legal entities established in Member States, Iceland and Norway and the following additional associated countries: Canada, Israel, Republic of Korea, New Zealand, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. In addition, entities established in third countries which may become associated to Horizon Europe during 2026 and 2027 may be eligible to participate in this topic if the third country is identified for this topic as an eligible country in the List of Participating Countries in Horizon Europe at the time of submission of the application[[See the List of Participating Countries in Horizon Europe available at https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/docs/2021-2027/common/guidance/list-3rd-country-participation_horizon-euratom_en.pdf.]]. In any case, the association agreement to the Programme must apply by the time of the signature of the grant agreement. For the duly justified and exceptional reasons listed in the paragraph above, in order to guarantee the protection of the strategic interests of the Union and its Member States, entities established in an eligible country listed above, but which are directly or indirectly controlled by a non-eligible country or by a non-eligible country entity, may not participate in the action unless it can be demonstrated, by means of guarantees positively assessed by their eligible country of establishment, that their participation to the action would not negatively impact the Union’s strategic assets, interests, autonomy, or security. Entities assessed as high-risk suppliers of mobile network communication equipment within the meaning of ‘restrictions for the protection of European communication networks’ (or entities fully or partially owned or controlled by a high-risk supplier) cannot submit guarantees.[[ The guarantees shall in particular substantiate that, for the purpose of the action, measures are in place to ensure that: a) control over the applicant legal entity is not exercised in a manner that retrains or restricts its ability to carry out the action and to deliver results, that imposes restrictions concerning its infrastructure, facilities, assets, resources, intellectual property or know-how needed for the purpose of the action, or that undermines its capabilities and standards necessary to carry out the action; b) access by a non-eligible country or by a non-eligible country entity to sensitive information relating to the action is prevented; and the employees or other persons involved in the action have a national security clearance issued by an eligible country, where appropriate; c) ownership of the intellectual property arising from, and the results of, the action remain within the recipient during and after completion of the action, are not subject to control or restrictions by non-eligible countries or non-eligible country entity, and are not exported outside the eligible countries, nor is access to them from outside the eligible countries granted, without the approval of the eligible country in which the legal entity is established.]] Described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes. 4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes. 5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds To ensure a portfolio coverage, grants will be awarded to applications not only in order of ranking, but also to at least one proposal focusing on each of the three sectors (one in healthcare, one in advanced manufacturing and one in-vehicle autonomous driving), subject to proposals passing all evaluation thresholds. Described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes. 5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual . 5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes. 6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants Beneficiaries must provide financial support to third parties. The support to third parties can only be provided in the form of grants. FSTP grants may be provided to either a single SME or to a small team of legal entities. Where provided to a small team, the coordinator (lead applicant) must be an SME and other recipients of financial support must be either an SME, a research organisation, and/or public body secondary or higher education establishment. FSTP amounts: The maximum amount to be granted per FSTP grant (whether provided to one legal entity or a team of legal entities) is EUR 300,000 in stage 2 and EUR 2,250,000 in stage 3. The amount of EUR 300,000 in stage 2 is justified as the challenge and corresponding tasks defined for this stage must be complex enough in order to take the best and most informed decision in the selection for the next stage based on a convincing technical prototype/proof of concept that reaches sufficient level of performance in terms of scale and maturity. The amount of EUR 2,250,000 in stage 3 is justified by the ambition of reaching significant technology progress and innovation, defined in the expected outcome of the call, including the need for the selected projects to scale their solutions to the maturity expected. The maximum amount to be granted to each third party is EUR 2,550,000. In accordance with Annex 5 of the grant agreement “SPECIFIC RULES FOR CARRYING OUT THE ACTION (— ARTICLE 18) Implementation in case of restrictions due to strategic assets, interests, autonomy or security of the EU and its Member States ”, by default beneficiaries must ensure that, inter alia , no recipient of FSTP is (i) established in a country which is not an eligible country (as identified in the specific conditions for eligibility) or (ii) controlled by such countries or entities from such countries (directly or indirectly as per the specific conditions for eligibility). In line with the possibility for the granting authority to agree otherwise, as concerns control of SMEs or private research organisations that participate as recipients of FSTP, beneficiaries must only ensure that such entities are not directly majority-owned (i.e., more than 50% of the capital) by entities established in non-eligible countries. Described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes. Specific conditions described in the [specific topic of the Work Programme] Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA): Application form templates — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System Standard application form (HE RIA, IA) Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations Standard evaluation form (HE RIA, IA) Guidance HE Programme Guide Model Grant Agreements (MGA) HE MGA &#xa0; Call-specific instructions &#xa0; Information on financial support to third parties (HE) &#xa0; Ownership Control Declaration Annex Additional documents: HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 1. General Introduction HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 7. Digital, Industry and Space HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 15. General Annexes HE Programme Guide HE Framework Programme 2021/695 HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764 EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509 Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions &#xa0; Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement Guidance on participation in EU calls with ownership and control restrictions

=== SUPPORT INFO ===
Online Manual is your guide on the procedures from proposal submission to managing your grant. Horizon Europe Programme Guide contains the detailed guidance to the structure, budget and political priorities of Horizon Europe. Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – find the answers to most frequently asked questions on submission of proposals, evaluation and grant management. Research Enquiry Service – ask questions about any aspect of European research in general and the EU Research Framework Programmes in particular. National Contact Points (NCPs) – get guidance, practical information and assistance on participation in Horizon Europe. There are also NCPs in many non-EU and non-associated countries (‘third-countries’). Enterprise Europe Network – contact your EEN national contact for advice to businesses with special focus on SMEs. The support includes guidance on the EU research funding. IT Helpdesk – contact the Funding & Tenders Portal IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc. European IPR Helpdesk assists you on intellectual property issues. CEN-CENELEC Research Helpdesk and ETSI Research Helpdesk – the European Standards Organisations advise you how to tackle standardisation in your project proposal. The European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for their recruitment – consult the general principles and requirements specifying the roles, responsibilities and entitlements of researchers, employers and funders of researchers. Partner Search help you find a partner organisation for your proposal.