INSTRUMENTO: Driving Urban Transitions to a sustainable future (DUT) Co-Funded Partnership
IDENTIFICADOR: HORIZON-CL5-2025-06-D2-07
AVISO: HORIZON-CL5-2025-06
CALL TITLE: Cluster 5 Call 06-2025 (WP 2025)
PROGRAMA: {'id': 43108390, 'abbreviation': 'HORIZON', 'description': 'Horizon Europe (HORIZON)'}
DIVISAO:  |  | 
TIPO DE ACAO: HORIZON Action Grant Budget-Based
DOTACAO:
2025: EUR 15,000,000
2025: EUR 12,000,000
2025: EUR 4,000,000
2025: EUR 30,000,000
2025: EUR 7,500,000
2025: EUR 56,000,000
2025: EUR 15,000,000
PRAZO: 2025-09-24 | 2025-09-24 | 2025-09-24 | 2025-09-24 | 2025-09-24 | 2025-09-24 | 2025-09-24
PALAVRAS-CHAVE: 

DESCRICAO:
Expected Outcome: This topic is a continuation of the Driving Urban Transitions to a sustainable future (DUT) Co-Funded Partnership to enable the roll-out of its full strategy and action plan and assist cities in their sustainability and climate neutrality transitions. Actions will contribute to the achievement of the European Green Deal targets, the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development commitments, the Urban Agenda for the EU, the New EU Urban Mobility Framework, the Habitat III New Urban Agenda and the Paris Agreement. European cities need to engage urgently in sustainability and climate-neutrality transitions. The partnership is expected to contribute to all of the following expected outcomes: Enhanced multi-level cooperation and alignment on R&I on sustainable urban development across and within cities, regions, and countries, including international outreach and cooperation with other networks and initiatives; EU is strengthened as a role model for R&I on sustainable urban development; cooperate with international cities and research funding networks (e.g., Belmont Forum) to align strategies and R&I agendas and strengthen the role of DUT as co-lead of the Urban Transitions Mission (UTM) under Mission Innovation (MI). In this context, potential synergies could be also considered with ongoing EU funded work related to Africa, to enhance the implementation of DUT Strategic Research &Innovation Agenda (SRIA); Set up innovative, cross-sectoral, and inclusive urban governance, policy, and decision-making harnessing the full potential of social science and citizens’ engagement in the city development process; Integrate emerging mobility and transport services, and align them with the citizens’ needs and preferences; Foster sustainable, climate-neutral, safe, resilient, socially inclusive, liveable, and attractive neighbourhoods, towns, cities and urban services, with reduced environmental footprint (e.g., burdens from other pollutants, foster the reuse of materials in view of increased integration of circularity aspects) and net-zero greenhouse emissions, and enhance well-being and quality of life for citizens; Empower local authorities, municipalities, businesses, social partners, civil society, knowledge institutions and citizens with necessary capacity, knowledge and skills; deliver efficient urban tools, solutions methodologies and processes to actively engage in sustainability and climate-neutrality transitions; Increase science and evidence-based implementation of the European Green Deal, the Urban Agenda for the EU and other European, national, regional, and local urban-relevant policies and strategies (e.g., Circular Economy Action Plan). Scope: The objective of this action is to continue to provide support to the European “Driving Urban Transitions to a sustainable future ” (DUT) Co-funded Partnership identified in the Horizon Europe Strategic Plan 2021-2024 – first implemented under the topic HORIZON-CL5-2021-D2-01-16: Co-Funded Partnership: Driving Urban Transitions (DUT) – and to fund additional activities (which may also be undertaken by additional partners) in line with its intended scope and duration, and in accordance with Article 24(2) of the Horizon Europe Regulation. The proposal should capitalise upon new collaboration opportunities offered by the Association Agreements to Horizon Europe, the “EU Climate Neutral and Smart Cities” Mission and the Global Urban Transitions Mission (UTM) of Mission Innovation to enhance expertise, capacities, critical mass and broaden geographical coverage and outreach capacity. With respect to international outreach, mutual benefits from collaboration and cooperation with global and international cities and research funding networks should be pursued to align strategies and research agendas and promote scientific evidence and good practice for urban policy at international level. Taking into account that the present action is a continuation of topic HORIZON-CL5-2021-D2-01-16 and HORIZON-CL5-2023-D2-01-08, it foresees an amendment to an existing grant agreement, the proposal should describe plans, activities and initiatives that would enable the DUT to ensure, as appropriate, a seamless pursuance of its strategy, objectives and actions to fill important gaps in knowledge, evidence, innovation, technology, data, capacity and skills, integrated approaches, while fostering inclusive and participatory governance structures and assisting cities at European (and, as appropriate, global) level in designing and implementing the transition towards sustainability and climate neutrality. The proposal should describe in detail additional activities (including additional partners) to be covered by the grant and justify their added value as compared to ongoing actions, whilst accounting for actual progresses in relevant EU and international policy frameworks and urban initiatives. The proposal is expected to cover DUT calls for proposals included in the work programme (2025-2027). from 2025 to 2027. The proposal should elaborate on modalities to scale-up synergies with the works of the NetZeroCities Mission Platform, the CapaCITIES coordination and support action and, as appropriate, with other EU Missions and related platforms (e.g., MIP4Adapt). Those synergies will underpin the implementation of the “EU Climate Neutral and Smart Cities” Mission and ensure the coherence and complementarity of activities while leveraging knowledge and investment possibilities. Furthermore, concrete actions should be envisaged to enhance collaboration and synergies with other European Partnerships such as Clean Energy Transitions (CET), Built environment and construction (Built4People), Rescuing biodiversity (Biodiversa+), Safe and Sustainable Food Systems, Towards Zero Emission Road Transport (2ZERO), Cooperative, Connected and Automated Mobility (CCAM), EIT Urban Mobility and Water4All. Interfaces with public procurement and investment programmes and links with Urban Innovative Actions (UIA) under the Urban Agenda for the EU, the European Urban Initiative (EUI) under the Cohesion Policy Funds, private funds, etc. should be explored to support take-up and larger scale implementation of tested approaches and solutions. The consortium that won the grant under topic HORIZON-CL5-2021-D2-01-16 is uniquely placed to submit a proposal to continue the envisioned partnership. It is noted that this consortium submitted the initial proposal leading to the identification of the partnership in the Horizon Europe strategic planning 2021-2024. Moreover, it has implemented the partnership through the co-funded calls in the years 2022 and 2023. In this context, the current consortium has specific expertise in relation to the objectives of the Partnership, the activities implemented in 2022 and 2023 co-funded calls, or other calls/scope of calls clearly required/envisioned pursuant to initial proposal/partnership, and other relevant aspects of the action. In practice, no other consortium would be able to continue the activities of the Partnership underway without a significant disruption of the ongoing activities. While the grant under this topic should be attributed to a proposal submitted by the coordinator of the consortium funded under topic HORIZON-CL5-2021-D2-01-16, the consortium applying to the present topic may include additional partners and new activities, to be funded by the grant subject to an evaluation, which will take into account the existing context and the scope of the initial evaluation (as relevant), and related obligations enshrined in the grant agreement.

CONDICOES DE ELEGIBILIDADE:
"> General conditions 1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes. Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System. 2. Eligible Countries described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes. A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide . 3. Other Eligible Conditions The proposal must be submitted by the coordinator of the consortium funded under HORIZON-CL5-2021-D2-01-16: Co-Funded Partnership: Driving Urban Transitions to a sustainable future (DUT). This eligibility condition is without prejudice to the possibility to include additional partners. described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes. 4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes. 5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds The evaluation committee will be composed partially by representatives of EU institutions. If the outcome of amendment preparations is an award decision, the coordinator of the consortium funded under the grant agreement that was established in response to the call topic HORIZON-CL5-2021-D2-01-16 and HORIZON-CL5-2023-D2-01-08 will be invited to submit an amendment to the grant agreement, on behalf of the beneficiaries. are described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes. 5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual . 5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes. 6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants This action is intended to be implemented in the form of an amendment of the grant agreement concluded pursuant to topics HORIZON-CL5-2021-D2-01-16 and HORIZON-CL5-2023-D2-01-08. For the additional activities covered by this action: The funding rate is up to 30 % of the eligible costs. Beneficiaries may provide financial support to third parties (FSTP). The support to third parties can only be provided in the form of grants. The maximum amount of FSTP to be granted to an individual third party is EUR 5.000.000. This amount is justified since provision of FSTP is the primary activity of this action and it is based on the extensive experience under predecessors of this partnership. The starting date of the grant awarded under this topic may be as of the submission date of the application. Applicants must justify the need for a retroactive starting date in their application. Costs incurred from the starting date of the action may be considered eligible (and will be reflected in the entry into force date of the amendment to the grant agreement). described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes. Specific conditions described in the specific topic of the Work Programme Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA): Application form templates — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System Standard application form (HE RIA, IA) Standard application form (HE RIA IA Stage 1) &#xa0; Standard application form (HE CSA) &#xa0; Standard application form (HE CSA Stage 1) &#xa0; Standard application form (HE RI) &#xa0; Standard application form (HE COFUND) &#xa0; Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations &#xa0; Standard evaluation form (HE RIA, IA) &#xa0; Standard evaluation form (HE CSA) &#xa0; Standard evaluation form (HE RIA, IA and CSA Stage 1) &#xa0; Standard evaluation form (HE COFUND) &#xa0; Guidance HE Programme Guide &#xa0; Model Grant Agreements (MGA) HE MGA &#xa0; HE Unit MGA &#xa0; Lump Sum MGA &#xa0; Operating Grants MGA &#xa0; Framework Partnership Agreement FPA &#xa0; Call-specific instructions &#xa0; Detailed budget table (HE LS) &#xa0; Information on financial support to third parties (HE) &#xa0; Information on clinical studies (HE) &#xa0; Guidance: "Lump sums - what do I need to know?" Additional documents: HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 1. General Introduction HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 2. Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 3. Research Infrastructures HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 4. Health HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 5. Culture, creativity and inclusive society HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 6. Civil Security for Society HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 7. Digital, Industry and Space HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 8. Climate, Energy and Mobility &#xa0; HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 9. Food, Bioeconomy, Natural Resources, Agriculture and Environment &#xa0; HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 10. European Innovation Ecosystems (EIE) &#xa0; HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 11. Widening participation and strengthening the European Research Area &#xa0; HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 12. Missions &#xa0; HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 13. General Annexes &#xa0; HE Programme Guide &#xa0; HE Framework Programme 2021/695 &#xa0; HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764 &#xa0; EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509 Decision authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment &#xa0; EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement &#xa0; Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual &#xa0; Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions &#xa0; Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement

INFORMACAO DE SUPORTE:
Online Manual is your guide on the procedures from proposal submission to managing your grant. Horizon Europe Programme Guide contains the detailed guidance to the structure, budget and political priorities of Horizon Europe. Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – find the answers to most frequently asked questions on submission of proposals, evaluation and grant management. Research Enquiry Service – ask questions about any aspect of European research in general and the EU Research Framework Programmes in particular. National Contact Points (NCPs) – get guidance, practical information and assistance on participation in Horizon Europe. There are also NCPs in many non-EU and non-associated countries (‘third-countries’). Enterprise Europe Network – contact your EEN national contact for advice to businesses with special focus on SMEs. The support includes guidance on the EU research funding. IT Helpdesk – contact the Funding & Tenders Portal IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc. European IPR Helpdesk assists you on intellectual property issues. CEN-CENELEC Research Helpdesk and ETSI Research Helpdesk – the European Standards Organisations advise you how to tackle standardisation in your project proposal. The European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for their recruitment – consult the general principles and requirements specifying the roles, responsibilities and entitlements of researchers, employers and funders of researchers. Partner Search help you find a partner organisation for your proposal.
