Title: MSCA and Citizens 2027
Identifier: HORIZON-MSCA-2027-CITIZENS-01-01
Call: HORIZON-MSCA-2027-CITIZENS-01 - MSCA and Citizens 2027

Framework Programme: Horizon Europe (HORIZON)
Programme Division: Promoting Public Outreach
Programme Division: Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions (MSCA)
Programme Division: Excellent Science
Programme Division: Horizon Europe (HORIZON)

Type of Action: 

Budget budgetTopicActionMap: {'113139': [{'action': 'HORIZON-MSCA-2027-CITIZENS-01-01 - HORIZON-CSA HORIZON Coordination and Support Actions', 'plannedOpeningDate': '1804550400000', 'deadlineModel': 'single-stage', 'deadlineDates': ['1812412800000'], 'budgetYearMap': {'2027': '15707365'}, 'expectedGrants': 50, 'minContribution': 100000, 'maxContribution': 350000}]}
Budget budgetYearsColumns: ['2027']

DESCRIPTION:
Expected Outcome:

 Project results are expected to contribute to the following outcomes:

 For researchers

 
- Enhanced opportunities to interact with citizens and local, regional and national authorities; 
- Improved communication skills and competences to interact with a non-research audience, notably with pupils and students. For organisations

 
- Increased reputation and visibility of participating organisations in terms of hosting excellent research projects towards the general public and possible future students; 
- Researchers’ work made more tangible, concrete, accessible, and thus opening research and science to all; 
- Improved outreach to all audiences across Europe, and notably those who do not have an easy access to science and research activities; 
- Better communication of R&I results and activities to society, increased and strengthened opportunities for citizens’ engagement. Scope:

 Proposals should cover both the organisation of the European Researchers’ Night and the implementation of the Researchers at Schools initiative.

 The European Researchers' Night takes place every year, on the last Friday of September. It supports events that can last up to two days: they can start on Friday and continue the following day. Pre-events, prior to the main event, and related post-events, such as wrap-up meetings or small-scale follow-up events, can also be organised. It is the occasion for a Europe-wide public and media event for the promotion of research careers.

 The European Researchers’ Night targets the general public, addressing and attracting people regardless of the level of their scientific background, with a special focus on young people and their families, pupils and students, and notably those who do not have easy access to, and thus are less inclined to engage in STEAM fields (science, technology, engineering, arts and mathematics) or research activities.

 The Researchers at Schools initiative brings school classes to research facilities and researchers to schools or other pedagogical and educational centres. This allows researchers to interact with pupils on societal challenges and on the key role of research to address them. Pupils will thus learn directly about research projects.

 Types of activities 

 European Researchers’ Night activities can combine education with entertainment, especially when addressing young audiences. They can take various forms, such as exhibitions, hands-on experiments, science shows, simulations, debates, games, competitions, quizzes, etc. Where appropriate, engagement with educational institutions should be sought in order to encourage formal and informal science education with the aim of improving the scientific knowledge base. The European Researchers’ Night should be highlighted as a European and Europe-wide event. Additionally, each proposal should promote the European Union, EU-funded research and its impact on citizens’ daily life in the most appropriate way, according to the set-up and the configuration of the event, its location and its activities.

 Researchers at Schools activities will allow researchers to showcase their work and interact with pupils. They can take various forms, such as presentations, discussions, speed-dating, citizen science, science shows, summer schools, nature walks or visits to research facilities. Where appropriate, researchers should receive training ahead of the activities on science communication, especially targeting a young audience. The Researchers at Schools activities should take place at any time during the project duration and should be subject to a dedicated promotion, particularly towards schools and other pedagogical and educational centres.

 Involvement of researchers funded by Horizon Europe or previous Framework Programmes, notably by the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions, is highly encouraged.

 Both the European Researchers’ Night and Researchers at Schools initiative should promote gender balance, diversity and inclusiveness in science in terms of planned activities and researchers involved.

 Partnerships and coordination at regional, national or cross-border levels will be strongly encouraged aiming at a good geographical spread and avoiding overlaps.

 Where appropriate, synergies should be sought with the newly created Science Comes To Town initiative, implemented through Work Programme Annex 11, Widening Participation and Strengthening the European Research Area.

 High-quality applications not retained due to lack of funding may be granted the status of associated events.

 Eligible costs will take the form of lump sum contributions as stipulated in Decision of 11 March 2021 authorising the use of lump sum contributions and unit contributions for Marie Skłodowska-Curie actions under the Horizon Europe Programme.

 The maximum requested EU contribution per proposal should not exceed EUR 350 000. All proposals are encouraged to bring additional sources of funding. The budget will be evaluated under the criterion 3 “Quality and efficiency of the implementation”. Proposals that exceed this maximum EU contribution might be penalised during the evaluation unless a strong justification is provided.

 Applicants are encouraged to submit proposals covering activities for both 2028 and 2029, including the organisation of two successive editions (2028 and 2029) of the European Researchers’ Night and implementation of Researchers at Schools activities during the project duration. Applicants should clearly state how they will communicate and promote the European nature of this action.

CONDITIONS:
"> General conditions 1. Admissibility Conditions: described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes.

 Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System.

 2. Eligible Countries: described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

 A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide .

 3. Other Eligible Conditions The following additional eligibility criteria apply: Activities carried-out in non-associated third countries are not eligible for funding.

 described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

 4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes.

 5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds To ensure a balanced portfolio covering the widest geographical coverage with events and activities held in as many eligible countries as possible, grants will be awarded to applications not only in order of ranking but at least also to each application that is highest ranked per country based on where the coordinator is established (including trans-national consortia), provided that the applications attain all thresholds

 are described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes.

 5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual .

 5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes.

 6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants Eligible costs may take form of lump sum contributions as stipulated in Decision of 11 March 2021 authorising the use of lump sum contributions and unit contributions for Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions under the Horizon Europe Programme.

 described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes.

 Specific conditions described in the specific topic of the Work Programme

 
 Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA): Application form templates — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System 

 Standard application form (HE CSA) For Information only. You must use the form that you can download in the process of submitting the application once the Call is open.

 Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations &#xa0;

 Standard evaluation form (HE CSA) &#xa0;

 Guidance 

 HE Programme Guide &#xa0;

 Model Grant Agreements (MGA) 

 Lump Sum MGA &#xa0;

 Call-specific instructions &#xa0;

 Detailed budget table (HE LS) &#xa0;

 Guidance: "Lump sums - what do I need to know?" 

 Additional documents: HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 1. General Introduction 

 HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 2. Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions (MSCA) 

 HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 15. General Annexes 

 HE Programme Guide 

 HE Framework Programme 2021/695 

 HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764 

 EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509 

 Decision authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme 

 Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment 

 EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement 

 Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual &#xa0;

 Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions &#xa0;

 Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement

SUPPORT INFO:
Online Manual is your guide on the procedures from proposal submission to managing your grant.

 Horizon Europe Programme Guide contains the detailed guidance to the structure, budget and political priorities of Horizon Europe.

 Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – find the answers to most frequently asked questions on submission of proposals, evaluation and grant management.

 Research Enquiry Service – ask questions about any aspect of European research in general and the EU Research Framework Programmes in particular.

 National Contact Points (NCPs) – get guidance, practical information and assistance on participation in Horizon Europe. There are also NCPs in many non-EU and non-associated countries (‘third-countries’).

 Enterprise Europe Network – contact your EEN national contact for advice to businesses with special focus on SMEs. The support includes guidance on the EU research funding.

 IT Helpdesk – contact the Funding & Tenders Portal IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc.

 European IPR Helpdesk assists you on intellectual property issues.

 CEN-CENELEC Research Helpdesk and ETSI Research Helpdesk – the European Standards Organisations advise you how to tackle standardisation in your project proposal.

 The European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for their recruitment – consult the general principles and requirements specifying the roles, responsibilities and entitlements of researchers, employers and funders of researchers.

 Partner Search help you find a partner organisation for your proposal.

CALL DETAILS:
  hasForthcomingTopics: False
  hasOpenTopics: False
  allClosedTopics: False
