TITLE: Demonstration for Long-duration Battery Energy Storage Systems (BATT4EU Partnership)
IDENTIFIER: HORIZON-CL5-2027-05-D2-08
CALL: HORIZON-CL5-2027-05 - BATTERIES and ENERGY
PROGRAMME: Horizon Europe (HORIZON)
PUBLICATION DATE: 2025-12-19

BUDGET OVERVIEW:
  - 113217 | year  | budget  | projects expected 
  - 113216 | year  | budget  | projects expected 
  - 113213 | year  | budget  | projects expected 
  - 113215 | year  | budget  | projects expected 
  - 113214 | year  | budget  | projects expected 
MGA TYPES: HORIZON Action Grant Budget-Based
PROGRAMME DIVISION: Global Challenges and European Industrial Competitiveness > Climate, Energy and Mobility > Energy Supply > Energy Storage > Horizon Europe (HORIZON)

CONDITIONS:
">

General conditions

1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout

﻿described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes.

Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System.

2. Eligible Countries

described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide.

3. Other Eligible Conditions

If projects use satellite-based earth observation, positioning, navigation and/or related timing data and services, beneficiaries must make use of Copernicus and/or Galileo/EGNOS (other data and services may additionally be used).

The Joint Research Centre (JRC) may participate as member of the consortium selected for funding as a beneficiary with zero funding, or as an associated partner. The JRC will not participate in the preparation and submission of the proposal - see General Annex B.

described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion

described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds

are described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes

are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual.

5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement

described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes.

6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants

The granting authority may, up to 4 years after the end of the action, object to a transfer of ownership or to the exclusive licensing of results, as set out in the specific provision of Annex 5.

described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes.

Specific conditions
 
described in the [specific topic of the Work Programme]

Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA):
 
Application form templates — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System

Standard application form (HE RIA, IA)

Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations 

Standard evaluation form (HE RIA, IA) 

Guidance

HE Programme Guide 

Model Grant Agreements (MGA)

HE MGA

Additional documents:
 
HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 1. General Introduction

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 8. Climate, Energy and Mobility

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 15. General Annexes

HE Programme Guide

HE Framework Programme 2021/695

HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764

EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509

Decision authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme

Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment

EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement 

Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual 

Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions 

Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement


DESCRIPTION:
Expected Outcome:

Projects are expected to contribute to all of the following outcomes:

 - Demonstrated system-level long-duration energy storage (LDES) solutions, explicitly aimed at enhancing grid stability, resilience, and flexibility in Europe.

 - Substantial reduction of Europe's dependence on critical raw materials through the use of abundant, low-cost, and sustainable materials.

 - Contribute to strategic insights for a coherent EU-wide stationary storage deployment strategy, enhancing European energy autonomy and sustainability.

 - Sufficient and reproducible operational data and insights to serve as reliable input towards detailed technoeconomic analyses. 
 
Scope:

Proposals should focus on system-level demonstrations of innovative long-duration (> 8 hours) battery storage concepts that can effectively support utility-scale energy systems or industrial consumers in achieving energy security and operational sustainability.

Projects are expected to cover all the following points:

 - Demonstration of advanced long-duration storage technologies not yet on the market such as novel redox flow batteries (standard or mediated), high-temperature systems, metal-air systems, multivalent chemistries (organic or aqueous), or other non-commercialised technologies or architectures.

 - Assessment and definition of use case(s) intended for the proposed technology (front-of-the-meter grid-scale storage, behind-the-meter large industrial energy consumer, firming of renewable generation) along with quantified impact on improved grid resilience, reduced emissions, safety, and lowered energy storage cost.

 - Assessment of hybridization potential of complementary energy storage technologies (e.g., redox flow batteries with supercapacitors) to optimize overall system performance for the intended use case(s) and extending system lifecycle.

 - Utilization of abundant, low-cost, and sustainable materials, explicitly prioritizing materials with reliable and scalable European supply chains, accompanied by realistic and detailed pathways to production routes at scale.

 - Integration of advanced digital technologies, for accurate state-of-charge (SOC), state-of-health (SOH), and lifetime predictions, optimizing battery management systems (BMS), energy management systems (EMS), and overall component performance for extended system longevity.

 - Comprehensive techno-economic analyses, including realistic assessments of CAPEX, OPEX, based on measured technical performance metrics (e.g., self-discharge rates, calendar life, cycle life, round-trip efficiency, necessary safety investments) to clearly establish economic viability and competitiveness for the intended use-case in comparison to the commercial, incumbent technology.

 - Comprehensive safety assessment at system-level, documenting potential concerns (e.g. flammability, toxicity, explosion potential) and mitigation strategies ahead of widescale adoption of technology.
 
The Commission initiative for Safe and Sustainable by Design[1] (SSbD) sets a framework for assessing the safety and sustainability of chemicals and materials which should be considered as a reference for project proposals.

Whenever the expected exploitation of project results entails developing, creating, manufacturing and marketing a product or process, or in creating and providing a service, the plan for the exploitation and dissemination of results must include a strategy for such exploitation. The exploitation plans are expected to include preliminary plans for scalability, commercialisation, and deployment (feasibility study, business plan) indicating the possible funding sources to be potentially used (in particular the Innovation Fund).

Proposals could consider the involvement of the European Commission's Joint Research Centre (JRC)[2] whose contribution could consist of performing experimental or desk-top research on battery performance or safety. For further information on the JRC’s possible contribution to the projects, please, search for additional publicly available information on the JRC’s website[3] (EU Science Hub) on the NCP portal, or request specific information from the JRC (JRC-NCP-Network@ec.europa.eu)

JRC will assure that all the other applicants receive the same information on the JRC’s possible contribution to the project (e.g., via the topic-specific FAQs under the Funding and Tenders Portal).

This topic implements the co-programmed European Partnership on Batteries (Batt4EU). As such, projects resulting from this topic will be expected to report on the results to the European Partnership on Batteries (Batt4EU) in support of the monitoring of its KPIs.

null

Activities are expected to achieve TRL 6-7 by the end of the project – see General Annex B. Activities may start at any TRL.

[1] https://research-and-innovation.ec.europa.eu/research-area/industrial-research-and-innovation/key-enabling-technologies/chemicals-and-advanced-materials_en

[2] https://joint-research-centre.ec.europa.eu/laboratories-z/battery-energy-storage-testing_en

[3] JRC NCP | Horizon Europe NCP Portal


SUPPORT INFO:
Online Manual is your guide on the procedures from proposal submission to managing your grant.

Horizon Europe Programme Guide contains the detailed guidance to the structure, budget and political priorities of Horizon Europe.

Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – find the answers to most frequently asked questions on submission of proposals, evaluation and grant management.

Research Enquiry Service – ask questions about any aspect of European research in general and the EU Research Framework Programmes in particular.

National Contact Points (NCPs) – get guidance, practical information and assistance on participation in Horizon Europe. There are also NCPs in many non-EU and non-associated countries (‘third-countries’).

Enterprise Europe Network – contact your EEN national contact for advice to businesses with special focus on SMEs. The support includes guidance on the EU research funding.

IT Helpdesk – contact the Funding & Tenders Portal IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc.

European IPR Helpdesk assists you on intellectual property issues.

CEN-CENELEC Research Helpdesk and ETSI Research Helpdesk – the European Standards Organisations advise you how to tackle standardisation in your project proposal.

The European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for their recruitment – consult the general principles and requirements specifying the roles, responsibilities and entitlements of researchers, employers and funders of researchers.

Partner Search help you find a partner organisation for your proposal.
