AVISO: HORIZON-JU-ER-2026-FA7-01
TITULO: Safety and certification guidelines and demonstration of safety components for hyperloop
CALL ID: HORIZON-JU-ER-2026-01
FRAMEWORK: {'id': 43108390, 'abbreviation': 'HORIZON', 'description': 'Horizon Europe (HORIZON)'}
DEADLINE: 
BUDGET (EUR): 
TYPES OF ACTION: {'status': {'id': 31094502, 'abbreviation': 'Open', 'description': 'Open'}, 'types': [{'typeOfAction': 'HORIZON-JU-RIA HORIZON JU Research and Innovation Actions', 'typeOfMGA': [{'id': 43027849, 'abbreviation': 'HORIZON-AG-LS', 'description': 'HORIZON Lump Sum Grant'}]}], 'plannedOpeningDate': '1770163200000', 'submissionProcedure': {}, 'deadlineDates': ['1778112000000']}
KEYWORDS: Alternative fuels and (transport) infrastructure, Disruptive innovation, Sustainable transport

=== DESCRIPTION ===
Expected Outcome:

Based on current trends and forecasts, the number of passengers will significantly increase in the upcoming decades, and the existing transport modes may face capacity limitations without infrastructure investments. Emerging technology for guided transport systems could be a complementary solution for the increased demand, increasing also the availability of sustainable transportation solutions. Hyperloop technology could be a promising alternative, since it promises very high-speed travel with low energy needs while relying on electricity.

Hyperloop is an unconventional fast track-bound transport system based on magnetic levitation and with “capsules” movement inside a vacuum tube. To ensure the applicability of this system, the safety level of this system should be demonstrated and had to be proven that this solution is at least as safe as the existing modes of transport such as rail or aviation. This call aims to develop the safety requirements, method and guidelines as well as identify certification processes which can be applied overall in Europe. In addition, it should validate some key safety components of the hyperloop system based on the defined safety guidelines which can directly support the CEN/CLC-JTC20 activities. The action will collaborate closely with CEN/CLC/JTC 20 “Hyperloop” and other relevant technical committees (e.g. CEN/TC 256, CLC/TC 9X, CEN/TC 391, ISO/TC 292) to support the definition of safety and performance requirements.

The Project stemming from this topic should address all the following work streams and is expected to provide the associated outcomes:

Work-stream 1: Safety and certification guidelines support

Safety is an indispensable element for the development and operation of any mass public transport system. In this regard, for the hyperloop system it is an even more essential part given it is a new proposed transport mode, not only for gaining public acceptance but firstly to ensure the demonstration of the safety and reliability for this potentially new unconventional fast track-bound transport mode operating in a low-pressure environment. This workstream aims to propose safety guidelines and safety and performance requirements to support future European standardisation activities. This is in view of analysing common safety target and methodology for the proposed hyperloop technology. Results available from the EU-Rail Hyper4Rail[1] should be also considered within this work-stream.

As hyperloop is considered as a cross-border transport solution, there is a need for a consistent and harmonised safety framework. This workstream should specify regulatory requirements and certifications procedures for hyperloop with close collaboration with CEN/CLC/JTC20[2] and other relevant technical committees (e.g. CEN/TC 256, CLC/TC 9X, CEN/TC 391, ISO/TC 292) while considering safety practices from existing transport modes such as rail and aviation.

Work-stream 2: Functional validation of safety components for hyperloop

Key hyperloop technologies should be validated in laboratory environment against the proposed safety requirements and procedures developed in Work-stream 1, so that their compliance can be assessed and open points of the proposed safety parameters can be potentially closed with the results of the testing activities. In addition a full proof of concept should be developed and tested to validate safety requirements and should demonstrate that certification procedures developed in Work-stream 1 can be successfully applied and verified in practice. This approach can further support the hyperloop promoters to pave the way to a creation of a solid regulatory framework for a unconventional fast track-bound transport mode.

Scope:

To successfully address the expected outcomes, the action to be funded under this topic should research, develop, and deliver upon all following research activities :

Work-stream 1: Safety and certification guidelines support

Within Work-stream 1 the following research activities should be carried out:

Definition of proposals for technical safety requirements Analyse the safety needs of the hyperloop technology following and supporting the work done in CEN/CLC/JTC20;
Collect best practices and data from the implementation of transport systems;
Benchmark existing safety regulatory requirements of other transport modes and define the commonalities;
Propose possible technical safety requirements related to infrastructure, design, operational protocols and system reliability for hyperloop systems for both passenger and freight in view of contributing to the prEN 18166:2025;
Specify a detailed list of possible safety requirements at the level of sub-system and component defined in the action.
 
 Development of a technical safety guideline proposal and input to standards: Analyse the system architecture defined in Hyper4Rail and EN 17930:2024 and specify a list of key sub-system and components relevant for safety and propose a detailed system definition for future European standards;
Carry out a sensitivity analysis of performances/operations and safety requirements for the hyperloop system with the aim to identify the target safety level based on results coming from Hyper4Rail;
Analyse the safety practices from existing transport modes such as rail and aviation and propose a common risk assessment approach for risk mitigation;
Identify and collect hazards built on the work done in Hyper4Rail and establish a safety method taking into account safety methods from other existing transport modes such as rail and aviation;
Recommendations for a common safety method for operations and maintenance of the hyperloop system including methods to verify compliance with the technical safety requirements;
Consultation with relevant regulatory bodies and collaboration with CEN/CLC/JTC20 and if relevant with other relevant technical committees (e.g. CEN/TC 256, CLC/TC 9X, CEN/TC 391, ISO/TC 292);
 
Develop a Certification Roadmap proposal: Identify the legal requirements and processes for certification of future hyperloop solutions based on experience from existing transport solutions;
Develop a roadmap including timelines, estimated costs (taking into account also the tests performed in WS2), and high-level designs of necessary certification facilities based on the hyperloop concept developed in Hyper4Rail;
Propose a basic decision-making structure (Including the possibility of using existing regulatory bodies EASA, ERA) leading to the authorisation of running operation in Europe of the hyperloop new potential transport system: on regulatory, standard and industry standard levels;
Consultation process with regulatory bodies: EASA, ERA, and others applying relevant regulations.
 
 Work-stream 2: Functional validation of safety components for hyperloop

Within work-stream 2 the following research activities should be carried out:

Functional validation of key technologies, components, and subsystems critical for passenger safety in laboratory environment (TRL4), with at least: Validation of control command and signalling system with special focus on the communication aspects in low frequency but high density environment;
Validation of at least 2 key components of the vehicle (e.g. braking systems or traction bogies) in a low pressure environment;
Validation of the functional interface for passenger exchange door on board the vehicle / platform screen door for passengers exit station.
 
Validation of the above systems according to the defined requirements and means of verification developed in work-stream 1 and testing activities performed in view of addressing the open point identified in wok-stream 1 .Design of the procedure and test environment needed to validate all safety requirements and to apply and verify the certification process defined in work-stream 1.
 null

Activities are expected to achieve a TRL 4 sub-system validation– see part B of Horizon Europe Work Programme 2026-2027 General Annexes for a guide to the TRL definitions and criteria to be used.

[1] https://rail-research.europa.eu/rail-projects/hyper4rail/

[2] https://standards.cencenelec.eu/dyn/www/f?p=205:7:0::::FSP_ORG_ID:2739090&cs=182927FD714A2A1F4116CCDD5C71BFF46

=== CONDITIONS ===
">General conditions

1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout

Regarding admissibility conditions and related requirements, part A of the Horizon Europe Work Programme 2026-2027 General Annexes applies, with the following exception: the limit for a full Research and Innovation Action application is set to 70 pages.

﻿described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes.

Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System.

2. Eligible Countries

described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide.

3. Other Eligible Conditions

described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion

described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds

The granting authority can fund a maximum of one project.

are described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes

The award criteria included in part D of the Horizon Europe Work Programme 2026 – 2027 General Annexes are complemented with additional criteria as specified in Annex VIII to this Work Programme.

are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual.

5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement

described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes.

6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants

The starting date of grants awarded under this topic may be as of the submission date of the application. Applicants must justify the need for a retroactive starting date in their application. Costs incurred from the starting date of the action may be considered eligible.

As specified in section 2.3.8.1 of the Work Programme, in order to facilitate the contribution to the achievement of the EU-Rail objectives, the options regarding 'linked actions' of the EU-Rail Model Grant Agreement and the provisions therein, is enabled in the corresponding EU-Rail Grant Agreements.

The action that is expected to be funded under this topic will be complementary to the following projects:

Hyper4Rail (GA 101196142)
 Eligible costs will take the form of a lump sum as defined in the Decision of 7 July 2021 authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (2021-2027) – and in actions under the Research and Training Programme of the European Atomic Energy Community (2021-2025) [[This decision is available on the Funding and Tenders Portal, in the reference documents section for Horizon Europe, under ‘Simplified costs decisions’ or through this link: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/docs/2021-2027/horizon/guidance/ls-decision_he_en.pdf]].

In addition, as specified in section 2.3.8.1 of the Work Programme, and to facilitate contributions to considering the key contributing role of this topic, in designing the dissemination and communication activities, the proposal shall consider that the project will be part of the overall EU-Rail Programme and to ensure coherence across the programme and alignment with Europe’s Rail objectives will have to follow the Europe’s Rail Communication and Dissemination Guidelines for Europe’s Rail Funded Projects as described in the EU-Rail Governance and Process Handbook (https://rail-research.europa.eu/about-europes-rail/europes-rail-reference-documents/functioning-of-the-europes-rail-ju/)

described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes.

Specific conditions

 Indicative Budget

The total indicative budget for the topic is EUR 3 million. Applicant Private [As defined in Article 2(5) of Council Regulation (EU) 2021/2085.] Members of the EU-Rail part of consortia responding to this topic must provide in-kind contributions to additional activities to be declared via the template model available on the F&T portal. The amount of total in-kind contributions (i.e. in-kind contributions for operational activities and in-kind contributions for additional activities) must be no less than 1.263 [In order to support a leverage factor of no less than the ratio between the contribution from members other than the Union and the Union financial contribution, as on the basis of Articles 88 and 89 of Council Regulation (EU) 2021/2085.] times the funding request, in aggregate, of these applicant Private Members. Any discrepancy must be well and duly justified.

In this respect, the grant agreements will set, in principle, annual deliverable on in-kind contributions for the projects selected under this topic, as well as mandatory reporting requirements, for those applicants who are Private Members of EU-Rail.

Indicative Project Duration

36 months. This does not preclude submission and selection of a proposal with a different project duration.

Special skills and/or capabilities expected from the Applicant(s)

Applicants should ensure that their proposals and consortium reflect the aggregated expertise to perform the activities and achieve the objectives set by the topic. This includes but is not limited to technical, engineering and operational competencies.

The applicants are expected to gather and reflect expertise from hyperloop technology providers and promoters, European Research Institutes, rail stakeholders to encompass Knowledge and vision on hyperloop solutions, bring the necessary expertise to deliver a design of concept and subsystem validation as well as contribute to the process of innovation. In additional, expertise on system engineering, certification and safety management processes as well as knowledge on standardisation, regulatory aspects and risk analysis are required.

Contribution to the monitoring and implementation, standardisation, of the EU-rail Programme

Applicants are expected to deliver relevant information (data, results, etc.) as mutually agreed, to the JU to contribute to the advancement of the Innovation and System Pillars [Refer to the Multi-Annual Work Programme available at https://rail-research.europa.eu/about-europes-rail/europesrail-reference-documents/europes-rail-key-documents/] activities, as well as in view of the development and implementation of EU policy and legislation (including Technical Specifications for Interoperability and Common Safety Methods) and the development of European standards. As specified in section 2.3.8.1 of this Work Programme, and to facilitate contributions to European or international standards, the EU-Rail grant agreements will include an additional information obligation related to standards. Beneficiaries must inform EU-Rail (up to four years after the end of the action) if the results can be reasonably expected to contribute to European or international standards.

Gender dimension

In this topic the integration of the gender dimension (sex and gender analysis) in research and innovation content is not a mandatory requirement.

Other

It is expected that the project stemming from this topic:

will be compliant with the EU Data Policy 2020 and associated legal instruments. This requires adherence to EU framework, including but not limited to the Open Data Directive (EU) 2019/1024 and associated implementing Regulation (EU) 2023/138 on high-value data sets, the Data Governance Act (Regulation (EU) 2022/868), the Data Act (Regulation (EU) 2023/2854), and the Interoperable Europe Act (Regulation (EU) 2024/903). Ensuring compliance involves verifying that data management, processing and sharing comply with applicable EU framework.
will consider the necessary resources – FTE and/or other – to ensure the monitoring of the project via regular reporting, reporting of data for the Programme KPIs, etc. The EU-Rail Governance and Process Handbook is available here for more information: https://rail-research.europa.eu/about-europes-rail/europes-rail-reference-documents/functioning-of-the-europes-rail-ju/

Europe's Rail - Work Programme 2026

WP 2026
Europe's Rail Master Plan

Master Plan
Europe's Rail - Multi Annual Work Programme

MAWP

Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA):

 Application form templates — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System

Application form - Part B (HE EU-RAIL, RIA)

Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations

Evaluation form (HE EU-RAIL, RIA/IA)

Guidance

HE Programme Guide 

Model Grant Agreements (MGA)

Lump Sum MGA 

Call-specific instructions 

Information on financial support to third parties (HE) 

Guidance: "Lump sums - what do I need to know?"

Additional documents:

 HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 1. General Introduction

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 15. General Annexes

HE Framework Programme 2021/695

HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764

EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509

Decision authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme

Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment

EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement 

Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual 

Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions 

Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement