TITLE: Advancing bio-printing of living cells for regenerative medicine
IDENTIFIER: HORIZON-HLTH-2027-03-TOOL-02
CALL: HORIZON-HLTH-2027-03 - Cluster 1 - Health (Single stage - 2027/2)
PROGRAMME: Horizon Europe (HORIZON)
PUBLICATION DATE: 2025-12-12

BUDGET OVERVIEW:
  - 113287 | year  | budget  | projects expected 
  - 113286 | year  | budget  | projects expected 
  - 113288 | year  | budget  | projects expected 
MGA TYPES: HORIZON Action Grant Budget-Based
PROGRAMME DIVISION: Horizon Europe (HORIZON) > Global Challenges and European Industrial Competitiveness > Health > Non-Communicable and Rare Diseases > Tools, Technologies and Digital Solutions for Health and Care, including personalised medicine

KEYWORDS: Biomaterial engineering, Biomedical engineering, Health-related biotechnology, Personalised treatment, Regenerative medicine, Tissue engineering

CONDITIONS:
">

General conditions

1. Admissibility Conditions, proposal page limit and layout

Admissibility conditions are ﻿described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes.

Proposal page limits and layout are described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System.

2. Eligible Countries

Eligible countries are described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide.

3. Other Eligibility Conditions

In recognition of the opening of the US National Institutes of Health’s programmes to European researchers, any legal entity established in the United States of America is eligible to receive Union funding.

If projects use satellite-based earth observation, positioning, navigation and/or related timing data and services, beneficiaries must make use of Copernicus and/or Galileo/EGNOS (other data and services may additionally be used).

The Joint Research Centre (JRC) may participate as member of the consortium selected for funding as a beneficiary with zero funding, or as an associated partner. The JRC will not participate in the preparation and submission of the proposal - see General Annex B.

Other eligibility conditions are described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion

Financial and operational capacity and exclusion are described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds

Award criteria, scoring and thresholds are described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes

The thresholds for each criterion will be 4 (Excellence), 4 (Impact) and 4 (Implementation). The cumulative threshold will be 12.

Submission and evaluation processes are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual.

5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement

Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes.

6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants

The granting authority may, up to 4 years after the end of the action, object to a transfer of ownership or to the exclusive licensing of results, as set out in the specific provision of Annex 5.

Legal and financial set-up of the grants are described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes.

Specific conditions
 
Specific conditions are described in the specific topic of the Work Programme.

Application and evaluation forms and additional documents:
 
Application and evaluation form templates

Standard application form (HE RIA, IA) - the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System

Standard evaluation form (HE RIA, IA) - will be used with the necessary adaptations

Guidance

HE Programme Guide

Model Grant Agreement (MGA)

HE MGA

Call-specific instructions 

Information on clinical studies (HE)

Additional documents
 
HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 1. General Introduction

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 4. Health

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 15. General Annexes

HE Programme Guide

HE Framework Programme 2021/695

HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764

EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509

Decision authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme

Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment

EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement

Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual

Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions

Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement


DESCRIPTION:
Expected Outcome:

This topic aims at supporting activities that are enabling or contributing to one or several expected impacts of destination “Developing and using new tools, technologies and digital solutions for a healthy society”. To that end, proposals under this topic should aim to deliver results that are directed at, tailored towards and contributing to most of the following expected outcomes:

 - Biomedical scientists from academia and industry will gain access to entire bio-printing units designed to regenerate human tissue.

 - Healthcare professionals acquire information on the safe and effective use of equipment enabling advanced therapies with bio-printed human tissue.

 - Healthcare providers dispose of tools enabling them to treat conditions of unmet medical need.

 - Individual patients will benefit from a personalised approach to their respective medical condition thanks to the bio-printed regenerative medicine solution.
 
Scope:

Tissue-specific functional 3D bio-printing of living cells has made significant progress as a new approach for transplantation applications in regenerative medicine. There are currently several types of bio-printing technologies under development for the repair of different targeted tissues or organs. To fully unleash the potential of bio-printed cell constructs for regenerative medicine several bottlenecks still need to be overcome. Various studies in pre-clinical models have shown that bio-printed cell constructs or tissues hold great promise for regenerative medicine, by allowing autologous tissue grafts being printed thus avoiding adverse graft-host reactions. However, translation of such approaches into clinical settings (i.e. humans) and their application to internal organs still needs to be investigated and demonstrated. Dependant on the actual target site (i.e. the defect tissue or organ in the human body) different bio-printing approaches may be preferable. For printing complex tissues and especially entire organs an in-vitro approach followed by transplantation is the preferred way. “In-situ” bio-printing, sometimes also referred to as “in-vivo”, or as “intraoperative”, reflects a bioprinting process performed on a live subject in a surgical setting and has in certain instances (e.g. tissue repair) advantages over an in-vitro bio-printing technique followed by transplantation. In-situ bio-printing involves direct patterning of bio-inks onto a patient’s body at the target site, allowing for precise construction of a site-matching tissue-structure within the actual physiological location where regeneration or repair is needed. As such, in-situ bio-printing allows for high adaptability, reduced risk of contamination, improved cell viability, function and host integration. The high cell densities present in the human vital organs underscore the importance of bio-inks which contain less additional biomaterials as matrix. Hence the bio-printing of cell constructs that comprise native tissue-like cell densities may facilitate repair and/or regeneration of defective complex tissues or internal organs. For such approaches meticulous engineering of the bio-printing equipment is necessary, involving sophisticated micro-surgical instrumentation and medical imaging platforms. To achieve the desired function and to mimic the natural cues in native tissues for in-vitro printed bio-constructs, the use of additional stimuli is needed, whereas in-situ approaches normally rely on the body as natural bioreactor providing the necessary extracellular cues. Recently, combinations of in-situ bio-printing with real-time stimuli have been investigated, even for the repair of internal organs. However, there remain bottlenecks that need to be overcome, like the integration with existing imaging modalities and surgical procedures or the long-time stability and functionality of the created bio-constructs.

To address these challenges, researchers should work in multidisciplinary teams with engineers, biomedical scientists, cell biologists and medical doctors. Proposals should be based on the use of human cells and address all the following activities:

 - Develop or improve existing bioprinting equipment that comprises all steps of the bio-printing suite to print bio-constructs with high cell-density for improved vascularisation and faster repair of the defect in the body.

 - Scale-up the chosen bio-printing technology to a Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP)[1] conform/compliant manufacturing process.

 - Perform all necessary regulatory work enabling the conduct of clinical studies and assess the clinical value of the developed bio-printing technology in first in-human studies.
 
Priority should be given to bio-printing approaches that either target vital internal organs followed by surgical grafting or employ in-situ approaches depositing the cell-laden bioink directly from the printhead or endoscope on the defect target site in the body.

Regulatory knowledge of the field is desired and should be documented through contacts with relevant national or international European regulatory authorities. A good understanding of the different steps involved and the inherent risks in each of these steps will be a basis to identify appropriate safety and quality requirements. Requirements from the different established EU frameworks on Substances of Human Origin (SoHO), medical devices and pharmaceuticals including Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products (ATMPs) should be considered for manufacturing/preparation as well as for clinical outcome monitoring. A combination of requirements from different frameworks might be most appropriate to allow for responsible and fast uptake.

Proposals under this topic may address any therapeutic area, i.e. any disease, dysfunction or defect. Sex differences at the cellular level should be taken into consideration.

Preclinical stage and clinical development are eligible. The involvement of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)[2] is encouraged.

The European Commission's Joint Research Centre (JRC) may contribute to the proposals selected for funding with work on strategic technologies for economic security and innovative industrial ecosystems, particularly activities on innovation in vitro biotechnologies.

Applicants should provide details of their clinical studies[3] in the dedicated annex using the template provided in the submission system. As proposals under this topic are expected to include clinical studies, the use of the template is strongly encouraged.

[1] https://health.ec.europa.eu/medicinal-products/eudralex/eudralex-volume-4_en

[2] https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32003H0361

[3] Please note that the definition of clinical studies (see introduction to this Work Programme part) is broad and it is recommended that you review it thoroughly before submitting your application.


SUPPORT INFO:
Online Manual is your guide on the procedures from proposal submission to managing your grant.

Horizon Europe Programme Guide contains the detailed guidance to the structure, budget and political priorities of Horizon Europe.

Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – find the answers to most frequently asked questions on submission of proposals, evaluation and grant management.

Research Enquiry Service – ask questions about any aspect of European research in general and the EU Research Framework Programmes in particular.

National Contact Points (NCPs) – get guidance, practical information and assistance on participation in Horizon Europe. There are also NCPs in many non-EU and non-associated countries (‘third-countries’).

Enterprise Europe Network – contact your EEN national contact for advice to businesses with special focus on SMEs. The support includes guidance on the EU research funding.

IT Helpdesk – contact the Funding & Tenders Portal IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc.

European IPR Helpdesk assists you on intellectual property issues.

CEN-CENELEC Research Helpdesk and ETSI Research Helpdesk – the European Standards Organisations advise you how to tackle standardisation in your project proposal.

The European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for their recruitment – consult the general principles and requirements specifying the roles, responsibilities and entitlements of researchers, employers and funders of researchers.

Partner Search help you find a partner organisation for your proposal.
