Title: Towards a European production of stable isotopes for novel nuclear medicine therapies (SAMIRA/ERVI)
Identifier: HORIZON-EURATOM-2026-01-05
Call Identifier: HORIZON-EURATOM-2026-01
Call Title: Nuclear research and training
Framework Programme: Euratom Research and Training Programme (EURATOM)
Actions/Types: {"status": {"id": 31094502, "abbreviation": "Open", "description": "Open"}, "types": [{"typeOfAction": "EURATOM-IA EURATOM Innovation Actions", "typeOfMGA": [{"id": 43252184, "abbreviation": "EURATOM-AG", "description": "EURATOM Action Grant Budget-Based"}]}], "plannedOpeningDate": "1776902400000", "submissionProcedure": {}, "deadlineDates": ["1789430400000"]}

--- DESCRIPTION ---

Expected Outcome:
the project results are expected to contribute to the following outcomes:
support for the development of EU production of stable isotopes that are essential for the manufacturing of radionuclides used in novel nuclear medicine therapies;
strengthening of the resilience and security of the EU medical radioisotope supply chain by securing access to source materials, reducing dependence on third countries and enhancing industrial-scale production (including the sourcing of stable isotopes);
leveraging of the knowledge and expertise of nuclear scientists, physicists and engineers in order to develop and optimise the processes for the EU-based production of stable isotopes, while contributing to Europe’s Beating Cancer Plan and implementing the Strategic Agenda for Medical Ionising Radiation Applications (SAMIRA). 
 Scope:
radiological and nuclear technologies are integral to modern healthcare. They play a crucial role in cancer care – from early detection and diagnosis to treatment and palliative support. They also support the diagnosis and management of a wide range of other conditions (including cardiovascular and neurological diseases). Each year, patients throughout the EU benefit from the application of nuclear medicine in the diagnosis and treatment of cancer and other serious conditions.
Innovations such as targeted radionuclide therapy (also known as radioligand therapy) are reshaping medicine by enabling more precise and personalised treatment. Medical radioisotopes are essential both for diagnostics and for an expanding array of therapeutic applications (particularly in oncology).
The EU’s supply of innovative radiopharmaceuticals for cancer therapy faces growing risks due to uncertainties over the availability of rare stable isotopes that are imported from Russia. One key concern is the availability of precursor materials for medical radioisotope production (particularly Yb-176, which is essential for innovative medicines in the EU). The EU’s reliance on Russia for Yb-176 and other stable isotopes is a strategic vulnerability. Reducing dependence on foreign suppliers and diversifying the supply chain will enhance the EU’s resilience and security of supply.
This action aims to mitigate supply risks by establishing the secure and sustainable production of stable isotopes. These include Yb-176, which is essential for Lu-177 manufacturing and is the main component of radiopharmaceuticals like Lutetium-177-PSMA (used to treat prostate cancer) and Lutetium-177 Dotatate (used in therapies against neuroendocrine tumours). The production of other stable radioisotopes to produce emerging alpha and beta emitters for targeted radiotherapy is considered in this call (e.g. Gadolinium (Gd) essential for Terbium (Tb) isotopes manufacturing). This will widen the portfolio of therapeutic radioisotopes and theragnostic pairs of radioisotopes in order to provide patients with personalised options in nuclear medicine for both diagnostics and therapy.
A key objective is to develop innovative, scalable and cost-effective methods for producing stable isotopes (particularly Yb-176), thereby reducing dependency on external suppliers and enhancing strategic autonomy. Ensuring a consistent and reliable isotope supply will enhance nuclear medicine therapies, thus benefit patients while strengthening the EU’s long-term resilience in the field. Interdisciplinary collaboration will be essential in achieving this goal.
The initiative should also foster partnerships with industry, policymakers and healthcare professionals, thus ensuring a comprehensive approach that aligns production capacity with clinical and commercial needs. Engaging stakeholders throughout the nuclear medicine value chain will enhance feasibility, scalability and market integration.
In addition to securing isotope supply, this action should stimulate innovation, attract investment and drive economic growth, thus reinforcing the EU’s leadership in nuclear medicine while also creating new opportunities in the sector.
This action should focus on closer-to-the-market activities (including prototyping, testing, demonstrating, piloting and scaling up new or improved products or processes). Proposals may include limited R&D activities. Activities are expected to focus on technology readiness levels 5 to 7 (indicative but not mandatory, depending on the innovative potential of the field).
The Commission recommends that consortia should use the JRC’s services where appropriate. The JRC may participate in the preparation and submission of the proposal. The JRC would bear the operational costs for its own staff and research infrastructure operational costs. The JRC’s facilities and expertise are listed in General Annex H to this work programme.

--- CONDITIONS ---

">Conditions
1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout
Described in General Annexes to the Euratom Work Programme 2026-2027, General Conditions, A - Admissibility
Proposal page limits and layout: layout described in Part B of the Application Form. For RIA & IA using lump sum the page limit of Part B is 45 pages. 

2. Eligible Countries
Described in General Annexes to the Euratom Work Programme 2026-2027, General Conditions, B - Eligibility.
See the List of Participating Countries in Horizon Europe (including Euratom) for up-to-date information on the current list of and the position for Associated Countries.
Please note that as of the date of the publication of this call, Ukraine and Switzerland are the only countries associated to the Euratom Programme, therefore eligible for funding.

3. Other Eligible Conditions
The Joint Research Centre (JRC) may participate as member of the consortium selected for funding.

Other eligible conditions are described in General Annexes to the Euratom Work Programme 2026-2027, General Conditions, B - Eligibility.

4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion
Described in General Annexes to the Euratom Work Programme 2026-2027, General Conditions, C — Financial and operational capacity and exclusion.

5a. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes
Described in General Annexes to the Euratom Work Programme 2026-2027, General Conditions, E — Documents and F — Procedure; and the Online Manual.

5b. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds
Described in General Annexes to the Euratom Work Programme 2026-2027, General Conditions, D — Award criteria.

5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement
Described in General Annexes to the Euratom Work Programme 2026-2027, General Conditions, F — Procedure.

6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants
Eligible costs will take the form of a lump sum as defined in the Decision of 7 July 2021 authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (2021-2027) – and in actions under the Research and Training Programme of the European Atomic Energy Community (2021-2025) [[This decision is available on the Funding and Tenders Portal, in the reference documents section for Horizon Europe, under ‘Simplified costs decisions’ or through this link: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/docs/2021-2027/horizon/guidance/ls-decision_he_en.pdf]].

General legal and financial set-up described in General Annexes to the Euratom Work Programme 2026-2027, General Conditions, G — Legal and financial set-up of the grant agreements.

Euratom WP 2026-2027
 Euratom Work Programme 2026-2027 for nuclear research and training 

Call document and annexes:
 Application form templates
Standard application form (HE RIA IA) — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System
Detailed budget table (HE LS)
Evaluation forms
Standard evaluation form (HE RIA IA) — will be used with the necessary adaptations
Model Grant Agreements (MGA)
Horizon Europe MGA
Lump Sum MGA

Additional documents:
 Euratom Research & Training Programme 2026-2027 (Council Regulation 2025/1304)
EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509
Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment
EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement
Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual 
Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions 
Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement