Title: Pillar III: Promoting public engagement in R&I and scientific literacy
Topic ID: HORIZON-WIDERA-2027-05-ERA-04
Call: HORIZON-WIDERA-2027-05 - Enhancing the European R&I system
Programme: 
Programme division: 
Publication date: 2025-12-12
SME flag: null
Tags: 
Keywords: 

=== ACTIONS ===
- status=Forthcoming | type=HORIZON-CSA HORIZON Coordination and Support Actions | MGA=HORIZON-AG-LS

=== BUDGET / DEADLINES ===
Action: HORIZON-WIDERA-2027-05-ERA-03 - HORIZON-CSA HORIZON Coordination and Support Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 6,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-11 | expectedGrants: 1 | min EUR 6000000 | max EUR 6000000
Action: HORIZON-WIDERA-2027-05-ERA-01 - HORIZON-CSA HORIZON Coordination and Support Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 2,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-11 | expectedGrants: 1 | min EUR 2000000 | max EUR 2000000
Action: HORIZON-WIDERA-2027-05-ERA-02 - HORIZON-CSA HORIZON Coordination and Support Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 29,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-11 | expectedGrants: 12 | min EUR 2000000 | max EUR 4000000
Action: HORIZON-WIDERA-2027-05-ERA-05 - HORIZON-RIA HORIZON  Research and Innovation Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 3,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-11 | expectedGrants: 1 | min EUR 3000000 | max EUR 3000000
Action: HORIZON-WIDERA-2027-05-ERA-04 - HORIZON-CSA HORIZON Coordination and Support Actions | budget: 2027: EUR 2,000,000 | deadlineModel: single-stage | deadlines: 2027-03-11 | expectedGrants: 2 | min EUR 1000000 | max EUR 1000000

=== DESCRIPTION ===
Scope: This topic aims to promote the adoption of ERA policies and practices delivering innovative approaches for enhancing science-society links and promoting scientific literacy. Proposals should contribute to the impact “Increasing trust in science and alignment of R&I with society’s needs, expectations and values”, thereby enhancing the democratic character and impact of science in the ERA. Applicants should select and clearly identify one area being addressed, choosing from the two areas outlined below. Both areas are designed to contribute towards the implementation of the ERA Structural Policy “Enhancing Trust in Science through Citizen Participation, Engagement and Science Communication”. Proposals should develop the activities outlined for the selected area and propose additional activities that contribute to achieving the expected outcomes. Project activities should reach large communities of stakeholders ensuring a wide geographical coverage, inclusivity, broad participation, and accessibility over the course of the project. Including stakeholders outside academia may be considered, for example, through citizen science. Proposals should describe their target group in terms of its scope and size. In project activities, particular attention should be paid to promoting inclusive gender equality and addressing gender-specific challenges where relevant. Expected project duration is up to 3 years without prejudice to a longer duration if justified. Area 1: Youth, science and democracy Expected outcome: Project results are expected to contribute to all of the following expected outcomes: Innovative ways for engaging young people in science and promoting scientific literacy; Common ERA approaches in engaging and communicating with young people in relation to R&I. Scope: Society increasingly faces complex problems that require citizens to have the capacity to participate in processes incorporating scientific analysis with deliberation about societal goals. In particular, involving young people in participatory scientific activities aimed at tackling social challenges fosters their scientific skills and scientific literacy. At the same time, it allows them to develop their civic and democratic skills, as civic engagement and scientific practice share characteristics like understanding systems, considering alternative explanations, and debating critically within a community. Area 1 promotes innovative ways to effectively and inclusively engage and involve young people in R&I. Additionally, it invites public engagement and science communication practitioners to build on best practices in the field and develop handbooks and guidelines, co-creating with relevant stakeholders, considering also previous EU-funded activities [1] . Project activities should target actors such as research performing organisations, universities, researchers and innovators, civil society organisations working with youth, science communicators, and policymakers. To achieve the expected outcomes, proposals should address the activities outlined below and propose any additional, complementary activities: Engage young people, in different national settings, in participatory science activities that tackle complex social issues (e.g., climate change, biodiversity loss, digital skills inequalities, economic effects of AI transitions, energy poverty, social inclusion), ensuring the inclusion of those not habitually involved in science; Create communities of practice that include public engagement experts, science communicators, citizen scientists, youth organisations, researchers and innovators, and policymakers with a view to co-developing handbooks and guidelines on engaging youth in science; Provide recommendations for developing common ERA approaches to engage and communicate with young people regarding R&I. Area 2: Scaling up science engagement at EU level Expected outcome: Project results are expected to contribute to all of the following outcomes: Scaling-up national initiatives on public engagement in R&I to ERA level taking into consideration different audiences, languages and contexts; Improved engagement and cooperation of researchers and innovators, science communicators, and public engagement experts with civil society; Increased understanding of the value of scientific processes by society and the importance of public needs and values in addressing societal challenges through R&I. Scope: Area 2 promotes scientific literacy and dialogue and constructive interactions between scientists and the wider public. To achieve this, it supports visits by researchers, for example, to civil society organisations, workplaces or community youth centres, enabling dialogue and collaboration between researchers and civil society and fostering mutual understanding. Event participants can thus enhance their knowledge of different scientific fields and research focuses, gain insights on the conduct of research and different research career pathways. Through these interactions, researchers can enhance their understanding of audiences and incorporate their knowledge and values into their work and communication. To achieve the expected outcomes, proposals should include the following activities outlined below and propose any additional, complementary activities: Develop online dialogue platforms, in different national (language) settings, containing profiles of researchers and innovators, their availability for public visits, and the scientific issues to be discussed; the platforms should also facilitate the arrangement of meetings between the researchers and interested organisations or institutions; Implement the meetings while taking care to reach out to and include members of the public not habitually involved in science, and adapting the science communication and public engagement for different audiences, languages and contexts; Take stock of all visits and provide lessons learned and recommendations for the future development of similar activities. [1] Notably projects funded under the H2020 Swafs programme and building on the findings of the Mutual Learning Exercise on Public Engagement in R&I and the Mutual Learning Exercise on Citizen Science .

=== CONDITIONS ===
"> General conditions 1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes. Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System. 2. Eligible Countries described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes. A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide . 3. Other Eligible Conditions Applications must be submitted by a consortium including participation, as beneficiaries, of at least three independent legal entities: Each established in a different Member State or Associated Country; and two of which are established in a Member State. described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes. 4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes. 5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds To ensure a balanced portfolio covering different ERA policy areas, as outlined in the expected outcomes and scope, grants will be awarded to proposals not only in order of ranking, but at least also to proposals that are the highest ranked within each area, provided that proposals pass all thresholds. are described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes. 5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual . 5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes. 6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants Eligible costs will take the form of a lump sum as defined in the Decision of 7 July 2021 authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (2021-2027) – and in actions under the Research and Training Programme of the European Atomic Energy Community (2021-2025) [[This decision is available on the Funding and Tenders Portal, in the reference documents section for Horizon Europe, under ‘Simplified costs decisions’ or through this link: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/docs/2021-2027/horizon/guidance/ls-decision_he_en.pdf ]]. described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes. Specific conditions described in the specific topic of the Work Programme. Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA): Application form templates — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System Standard application form (HE CSA) Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations &#xa0; Standard evaluation form (HE CSA) &#xa0; Guidance HE Programme Guide &#xa0; Model Grant Agreements (MGA) Lump Sum MGA &#xa0; Call-specific instructions &#xa0; Detailed budget table (HE LS) &#xa0; Guidance: "Lump sums - what do I need to know?" Additional documents: HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 1. General Introduction HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 11. Widening participation and strengthening the European Research Area HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 15. General Annexes HE Programme Guide HE Framework Programme 2021/695 HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764 EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509 Decision authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual &#xa0; Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions &#xa0; Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement

=== SUPPORT INFO ===
Online Manual is your guide on the procedures from proposal submission to managing your grant. Horizon Europe Programme Guide contains the detailed guidance to the structure, budget and political priorities of Horizon Europe. Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – find the answers to most frequently asked questions on submission of proposals, evaluation and grant management. Research Enquiry Service – ask questions about any aspect of European research in general and the EU Research Framework Programmes in particular. National Contact Points (NCPs) – get guidance, practical information and assistance on participation in Horizon Europe. There are also NCPs in many non-EU and non-associated countries (‘third-countries’). Enterprise Europe Network – contact your EEN national contact for advice to businesses with special focus on SMEs. The support includes guidance on the EU research funding. IT Helpdesk – contact the Funding & Tenders Portal IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc. European IPR Helpdesk assists you on intellectual property issues. CEN-CENELEC Research Helpdesk and ETSI Research Helpdesk – the European Standards Organisations advise you how to tackle standardisation in your project proposal. The European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for their recruitment – consult the general principles and requirements specifying the roles, responsibilities and entitlements of researchers, employers and funders of researchers. Partner Search help you find a partner organisation for your proposal.