INSTRUMENTO: Soutenir la mise en œuvre de la mission «Villes neutres pour le climat et intelligentes»
CODIGO: HORIZON-MISS-2026-04-CIT-01
FONTE: EU Funding & Tenders Portal / Horizon Europe (HORIZON)
DATA_DOWNLOAD: 2026-05-05

NOME OFICIAL: Energy efficient urban and sub-urban public transport, complemented by shared mobility
CALL: HORIZON-MISS-2026-04
CALL TITLE: Supporting the implementation of the Climate-Neutral and Smart Cities Mission
PROGRAMA: HORIZON - Horizon Europe (HORIZON)
TIPO ACAO: 

DOTACAO:
  2026: EUR 20.000.000

PRAZOS:
ABERTURA: 2026-02-04
DEADLINE: 2026-10-08
MODELO_PRAZO: single-stage

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: Climate change mitigation, Decarbonisation, Mobility and transportation, Mobility management, Sustainable transport, Transport & Mobility

DESCRICAO E IMPACTO ESPERADO:
Expected Outcome:

This topic aims at supporting activities that are enabling or contributing to the Climate-Neutral and Smart Cities Mission by accelerating the transition towards climate neutrality in cities. To this end, project results are expected to contribute to all of the following expected outcomes:

- Cities involved in this action advance in achieving their climate neutrality targets, reducing greenhouse gas and air pollutant emissions by improving energy efficiency in urban and sub-urban public transport systems, complemented by urban mobility service car fleets – taxis, ride-hailing, car sharing and other active and shared mobility services.
- Comprehensive inventory and assessment of existing instruments and measures to foster electrification and attractiveness of urban and sub-urban public transport systems, urban mobility service car fleets and shared mobility, accompanied by targeted guidance for responsible authorities, operators and providers through integration of measures to improve energy efficiency in public transport and new shared mobility services.
- Upscaling of innovative and sustainable integrated mobility solutions, identifying gaps and shortcomings in existing systems and exchanging of best practices in the pilot sites involved in the action leading to a state-of-the-art of electrification and attractiveness of urban and suburban public transport with complementary urban mobility service car fleets and other active and shared mobility solutions.
- Enhanced assessment tools to quantify the direct benefits and associated co-benefits of decarbonised urban mobility service car fleets and of new shared mobility solutions complementary to public transport (including evaluation of impacts on modal shift, increased intermodal mobility and diverse user needs), the trade-off analysis between different solution and the recommendation of the most suitable implementation strategies, thereby helping to attract public investments.

Further progress towards achieving the targets set by relevant EU strategies and policies such as the Zero Pollution Action Plan[1], the Sustainable and Smart Mobility Strategy[2], the new EU Urban Mobility Framework[3], the Decarbonise Corporate Fleets Communication[4] and the Energy Efficiency Directive[5].

Scope:

Public transport is firmly at the centre of sustainable urban mobility policies at EU level and across Member States, in complementarity with active mobility and shared mobility services. However more needs to be done to make sure that urban and suburban public passenger transport, including coaches, and urban mobility service car fleets are energy efficient and attractive, contributing to climate neutrality targets as well as to cleaner and healthier urban and sub-urban environments.

In addition, an optimal integration of public transport with other/new shared mobility services can increase its uptake by offering services that are complementary, offering coherent solutions allowing interconnection between mass transit and “last-mile” solutions. Designing urban and sub-urban systems that are energy-efficient and attractive and are tailored for complementary mobility options requires different thinking: e.g. new approaches to integrated urban planning; changes to or upgrades of infrastructure and redistribution of public space; better use of data and technology solutions to enable effective multimodality, including leveraging AI solutions; targeted local policies to promote and integrate different mobility options, to increase connectivity especially in peri-urban, rural, and underserved areas throughout the city, extending beyond the city centre.

The objective of this topic is to explore and test solutions to increase energy-efficiency and attractiveness of urban and sub-urban public transport, urban mobility service car fleets, and other active and shared mobility solutions, in the pilot sites involved in the proposals, including by facilitating exchange of experiences and good practices and fostering learning at European level. The work should lead to an updated and comprehensive overview of the state of the art of the electrification of urban and sub-urban public transport systems, and urban mobility service car fleets and shared mobility solutions, including an assessment of gaps and shortcomings in existing systems.

The topic invites proposals from consortia including at least three cities from different Member States or Associated Countries along with at least three follower cities, ensuring a good geographical balance. Follower cities can be from the same Member State or Associated Country as the lead cities. At least one of the three lead cities must be one of the 112 cities selected for the EU Mission on Climate-neutral and Smart Cities. The consortium should bring together academia, responsible local authorities, public transport operators, urban mobility service car fleet providers, shared mobility service providers, and other relevant stakeholders. The goal is to collaboratively test and implement a mix of technological and non-technological innovations, along with policy-based measures, to enhance the energy efficiency and appeal of urban and suburban public transport in complementarity with urban mobility service car fleets and shared mobility solutions. An assessment of the overall ecological footprint, including impacts on air quality, of the tested solutions should also be carried out, taking into account the whole value chain and possible rebound effects.

From the lessons learnt through the testing of solutions, recommendations and guidance on optimal integration of energy efficient urban and suburban public transport with urban mobility service car fleets, active and shared mobility solutions should be provided for local authorities and public transport operators. Recommendations and measures could cover e.g. newly-emerging technologies and soft measures such as marketing, real time information and awareness raising campaigns and co-creation of user-oriented and environmentally sustainable solutions– with particular regard to the specific needs of diverse user groups. Proposals could test the establishment of new operating and business models. Proposals may also include take-up and replication actions, research activities, as well as tools to support local planning and policy making. To facilitate replication, upscaling and up-taking of the generated outcomes and to foster capacity building/upskilling of public authorities, local actors and communities, actions should engage in outreach, communication, dissemination and training activities.

This topic requires the effective contribution of SSH disciplines and the involvement of SSH experts, institutions as well as the inclusion of relevant SSH expertise, in order to produce meaningful and significant effects enhancing the societal impact of the related research activities.

Collaboration with the Cities Mission Platform is essential and should take place through the CIVITAS initiative[6]. Proposals should ensure that appropriate provisions for activities and resources aimed at enforcing clustering activities and cooperation with the Cities Mission Platform and the CIVITAS initiative are included in the work-plan[7]. Proposals should plan for an active collaboration amongst the projects selected under this topic - for dissemination, evaluation and coordination - facilitated by and within the CIVITAS initiative.

null

Activities are expected to achieve TRL 7-8 by the end of the project – see General Annex B.

[1] COM(2021) 400 final

[2] COM(2020) 789 final

[3] COM(2021)811

[4] COM(2025) 96 final

[5] DIRECTIVE (EU) 2023/1791 OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 13 September 2023 on energy efficiency and amending Regulation (EU) 2023/955

[6] https://civitas.eu/

[7] The CIVITAS initiative should establish, through a collaboration agreement set up together with the Cities Mission Platform, clear links with the Mission portfolio for synergies and complementarities.

CONDICOES / ELEGIBILIDADE / CRITERIOS:
">General conditions1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout

﻿described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes.

Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System.

2. Eligible Countries

described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide.

3. Other Eligible Conditions

The following additional eligibility criteria apply:

At least three lead cities, represented by a local authority or by an entity with an explicit consent from the local authority, from different Member States or Associated Countries along with at least three follower cities, must participate ensuring a good geographical balance. Follower cities can be from the same Member State or Associated Country as the lead cities. At least one of the three lead cities must be one of the 112 cities selected for the EU Mission on Climate-Neutral and Smart Cities[[ The EU Mission on Climate-Neutral and Smart Cities aims to deliver 100 climate-neutral and smart cities by 2030 and ensure that these cities act as experimentation and innovation hubs to enable all European cities to follow suit by 2050. On 28 April 2022, the Commission announced the 100 EU cities that will participate in the Mission. In addition, 12 cities have been selected from countries associated or expected to be associated the Horizon Europe programme.]].

Subject to restrictions for the protection of European communication networks.

described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion

described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds

are described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes

are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual.

5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement

described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes.

6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants

Grants awarded under this topic will be linked to the following action(s):

HORIZON-MISS-2021-CIT-02-03

Collaboration with the Cities Mission Platform[[Set up by Horizon 2020 project NetZeroCities - Accelerating cities' transition to net zero emissions by 2030, Grant Agreement n. 101036519, and scaled up through topic HORIZON-MISS-2021-CIT-02-03: Framework Partnership Agreement (FPA) for the Climate-Neutral and Smart Cities Mission Platform.]] is essential and projects must ensure that appropriate provisions for activities and resources aimed at enforcing this collaboration are included in the work plan of the proposal. The collaboration with the Cities Mission Platform must be formalized through a Memorandum of Understanding or a collaboration agreement to be concluded as soon as possible after the project starting date.

described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes.

Specific conditions 

Not applicable.

Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA): 

Application form templates — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System

Standard application form (HE RIA, IA)

Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations 

Standard evaluation form (HE RIA, IA)&#xa0;

Guidance

HE Programme Guide&#xa0;

Model Grant Agreements (MGA)

HE MGA&#xa0;

HE Unit MGA&#xa0;

Call-specific instructions&#xa0;

Not applicable.

Additional documents: 

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 1. General Introduction

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 12. Missions

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 15. General Annexes

HE Programme Guide

HE Framework Programme 2021/695

HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764

EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509

Decision authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme

Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment

EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement 

Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual&#xa0;

Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions&#xa0;

Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement

INFORMACAO DE SUPORTE:
Online Manual is your guide on the procedures from proposal submission to managing your grant.

Horizon Europe Programme Guide contains the detailed guidance to the structure, budget and political priorities of Horizon Europe.

Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – find the answers to most frequently asked questions on submission of proposals, evaluation and grant management.

Research Enquiry Service – ask questions about any aspect of European research in general and the EU Research Framework Programmes in particular.

National Contact Points (NCPs) – get guidance, practical information and assistance on participation in Horizon Europe. There are also NCPs in many non-EU and non-associated countries (‘third-countries’).

Enterprise Europe Network – contact your EEN national contact for advice to businesses with special focus on SMEs. The support includes guidance on the EU research funding.

IT Helpdesk – contact the Funding & Tenders Portal IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc.

European IPR Helpdesk assists you on intellectual property issues.

CEN-CENELEC Research Helpdesk and ETSI Research Helpdesk – the European Standards Organisations advise you how to tackle standardisation in your project proposal.

The European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for their recruitment – consult the general principles and requirements specifying the roles, responsibilities and entitlements of researchers, employers and funders of researchers.

Partner Search help you find a partner organisation for your proposal.

FONTE OFICIAL: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/opportunities/topic-details/HORIZON-MISS-2026-04-CIT-01