HORIZON-JU-GH-EDCTP3-2026-03-SERP-01
Title: Training and innovation networks for sustained capacity development related to ethics, regulatory, pharmacovigilance, and related digital regulatory platforms
Call Identifier: HORIZON-JU-GH-EDCTP3-2026-03
Programme: Horizon Europe (HORIZON)
Status: Open
Type of Action: HORIZON-JU-CSA HORIZON JU Coordination and Support Actions
Budget: EUR 15,000,000 (2026)
Expected Grants: 10
Contribution per Grant: EUR 1,500,000 (fixed)
Opening Date: January 13, 2026
Submission Deadline: September 13, 2026
Funding Model: Horizon Lump Sum Grant

Keywords: Artificial intelligence, Big data, Digital Services and Platforms, Digital transformation, Epidemiology, Ethics in medical sciences, Global health, Health data, Health sciences, Medical biotechnology related ethics, Medical ethics, Pharmacovigilance, Regulatory affairs, eInfrastructure

EXPECTED IMPACT:
Through strategic capacity building, digital transformation, and cooperation in SSA (sub-Saharan Africa), the actions funded under this topic should contribute to the establishment of a resilient and future-ready ethics, regulatory and pharmacovigilance (PV) environment.

BACKGROUND:
Ethics bodies, regulatory agencies, and pharmacovigilance (PV) systems in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) continue to face significant challenges that hinder effective provision of healthcare services, safety reporting and timely regulatory approval for clinical trials, and marketing authorisation of products. These challenges are largely attributed to limited resources, limited training provision and access to mentor expertise, governance constraints, disparities in digital infrastructure, and limited regional and international regulatory alignment.

In response, initiatives such as the African Vaccines Regulatory Forum (AVAREF), the African Medicines Regulatory Harmonization (AMRH) Programme and most recently the African Medicines Agency (AMA) have been launched to address these gaps. International bodies, including the World Health Organization (WHO), along with partnerships in SSA, have contributed to bridge the gap by offering technical support, training, and resources to strengthen ethics, regulatory and PV capacities.

As per the WHO publication of October 2025, eight SSA National Regulatory Authorities (NRAs) including Ghana, Nigeria, South Africa, Tanzania, Rwanda, Senegal, and Zimbabwe are classified by WHO as Maturity Level 3 (ML3), indicating reasonably established and functioning regulatory systems. Nevertheless, major hurdles remain, such as the lack of harmonised regulatory standards and timelines, underfunded research ethics committees (RECs) and NRAs, disparities in institutional and digital capacity and sustainability of the systems set up.

EXPECTED OUTCOMES:
Proposals submitted under this topic should aim to deliver results contributing to increased regulatory capacity of national, regional (supranational) or continental Regulatory Authorities for clinical trial oversight, registration and marketing authorisation and PV functions to operate at WHO maturity level 3 (ML3) as benchmarked against WHO Global Benchmarking Tool for medical products (therapeutics and vaccines) and/or increased research ethics oversight capacity using the WHO Research Ethics Oversight Benchmarking tool.

In addition, proposals are expected to lead to at least two of the following:
1. Improved digital infrastructure including emerging digital technologies (AI and/or big data) in SSA for the assessment of clinical trial protocols by RECs and/or regulatory authorities and/or applications for marketing authorisation.
2. Availability and accelerated use of digital technologies and data analytics, for real-time safety data monitoring and reporting, and timely PV data sharing across countries in SSA.
3. Greater harmonisation, coordination and streamlining of research ethics processes within countries to allow for efficient processes for ethics review of multi-centre trials.
4. Greater alignment and cooperation across countries in SSA regarding global standards in ethics, regulatory and PV.
5. Greater preparedness for emergency use authorisation through implementation of accelerated and harmonised processes.

SCOPE:
Proposals submitted under this topic should address persistent gaps in ethics, regulatory and/or PV systems evaluating medical products (therapeutics and vaccines) by strengthening existing and/or building new networks:

1. Proposals should address the capability to provide scientific advice, enhancement of knowledge on assessing complex innovative clinical trial applications and/or assessing marketing authorisation files, and/or PV capabilities including AI and big data as appropriate, strengthening capacity for ethics committees and/or regulatory agencies.

2. Proposals should establish and strengthen training and twinning networks or a regional regulatory authority dedicated to training ethicists and regulators to ensure sustainable capacity for Ethics Committees, and/or Regulatory Authorities and/or PV across countries in SSA.

Proposals should ensure capacity building across countries in SSA, including a leadership development program such as training of trainers for ethics capability building, and knowledge sharing across countries in SSA.

CONSORTIUM REQUIREMENTS:
- Minimum 3 independent entities from 3 different countries
- At least one entity from EU/Associated Country (EDCTP member)
- At least one entity from sub-Saharan African EDCTP member state
- Eligible SSA countries include Ghana, Nigeria, South Africa, Tanzania, Rwanda, Senegal, Zimbabwe, and 22+ others
- If non-SSA coordinator: mandatory scientific project leader from SSA required
- Beneficiaries may provide grants to third parties (maximum EUR 60,000 each)

EVALUATION CRITERIA:
Excellence and Impact threshold: 4 out of 5
Quality and Efficiency threshold: 3 out of 5
Overall threshold: 12 points combined

OUT OF SCOPE:
Capacity building related to Manufacturing activities for pharmaceutical/vaccines products including but not limited to batch release, support for local manufacturing of active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) and Technology Transfer, diagnostic production, financing, strategic and policy Support Mechanisms for manufacturing are out of the scope of this topic. However, the scope includes strengthening of NRAs capacity to carry out manufacturers inspections enabling registration and marketing authorization of medical products.

EDCTP Association may offer technical support for proposal preparation. The granting authority will base its funding decision on the ranking of proposals considering diversity of geography and topics (Ethics/Regulatory/PV).
