INSTRUMENTO: Climate simulations data and knowledge for optimal support of IPCC Assessments and International Policy
IDENTIFICADOR: HORIZON-CL5-2025-06-D1-01
AVISO: HORIZON-CL5-2025-06
CALL TITLE: Cluster 5 Call 06-2025 (WP 2025)
PROGRAMA: {'id': 43108390, 'abbreviation': 'HORIZON', 'description': 'Horizon Europe (HORIZON)'}
DIVISAO:  |  | 
TIPO DE ACAO: HORIZON Lump Sum Grant
DOTACAO:
2025: EUR 15,000,000
2025: EUR 12,000,000
2025: EUR 4,000,000
2025: EUR 30,000,000
2025: EUR 7,500,000
2025: EUR 56,000,000
2025: EUR 15,000,000
PRAZO: 2025-09-24 | 2025-09-24 | 2025-09-24 | 2025-09-24 | 2025-09-24 | 2025-09-24 | 2025-09-24
PALAVRAS-CHAVE: 

DESCRICAO:
Expected Outcome: Project results are expected to contribute to all of the following expected outcomes: The institutions in charge of generating the relevant information for decision makers can access and utilise in a timely manner scientifically robust climate projections corresponding to a range of future scenarios and their corresponding greenhouse gas emission pathways, including scenarios matching the Paris Agreement targets; Decision makers and society can better understand the impacts, risks and implications of pathways involving different magnitudes and durations of temperature overshoot; The European research community provides a coordinated contribution to the IPCC and other major scientific initiatives (e.g., IPBES, WCRP, World Adaptation Science Programme (WASP), the Global Carbon Budget), in support of informing the UNFCCC process and other global, European and national climate efforts; The activities of international programmes and communities like the Integrated Assessment Modelling Consortium (IAMC), the CMIP, the CORDEX and Inter-Sectoral Impact Model Intercomparison Project (ISIMIP) are better coordinated between each other, with outcomes more consistent and responding to policy needs better and in a timelier manner; The European contribution to these programmes is supported by an improved and interconnected overarching infrastructure. Scope: Given the rapidly developing climate crisis, there is an increasing need for accurate, reliable, and actionable information at global to local spatial scales, and near to long timescales. This information supports a range of requirements, including policy related ones. In particular, simulations and knowledge delivered that feed into the IPCC, including the Seventh Assessment Report (AR7) and later ones, should be internally coherent and well-coordinated. The modelling, setting, ensemble, and simulation design should be suited to meet societal and policy demands to support timelier European and international climate policy developments. This also implies progressing towards an operational framework to provide the best possible information for societal decision-making that brings together available approaches. The resulting simulations and analysis should sample the full spectrum of climate risks. In particular, as global mitigation efforts are presently insufficient and temperatures continue to rise, the impacts of global warming overshoot on the Earth system and the feasibility, possible pace, and implications of bringing global temperatures down in a sustainable way after an overshoot need to be explored. This analysis should also consider the risks and consequences of potential abrupt and irreversible impacts (e.g., sea level rise, changes in ocean circulation, ocean-acidification, water cycle alterations, soil alterations, aridification, species extinctions, loss of sea ice, glaciers, and ice sheets, and crossing climate and ecological tipping points). Therefore, actions should address all of the following aspects: Generate future global climate projections with state-of-the-art Earth System Models (ESM) which are built on the latest improvements in modelling technologies and in process understanding with a more complete representation of climate–carbon cycle feedback; Design climate simulations considering the socio-economic scenarios from the most up to date set of Integrated Assessment Models (IAM). Greenhouse gas emission pathways should be provided based on various societal mitigation and adaptation choices and land-use scenarios. Climate feedback should be also considered. The resulting assessment should link allowable carbon emissions with key climate targets, spanning policy relevant temporal and spatial scales; Deliver scenarios and simulations with different levels and durations of warming overshoot (to be selected for their policy relevance), assessing the corresponding risks accounting for fast and slow onset processes and the feasibility and limits of carbon dioxide removal methodologies; Update and coordinate the assumptions as well as the observational and simulated climate data sets underpinning the models and experiments of the various climate science communities (including Earth system, sectoral impacts, adaptation, and mitigation modellers) across international programmes, such as IAMC, CMIP, CORDEX and ISIMIP, optimising the interaction between them as much as possible within the same IPCC cycle; Design a framework to coordinate and incorporate the suite of global and regional climate projections, encompassing the range of available model resolutions and model realism, using consistent concentration and emission-driven ESMs, enhancing collaboration between European Earth system modelling and service provision, such as Copernicus and Destination Earth. This system should include cross-analysis and evaluation of the full suite of models, including approaches for sampling projection and scenario uncertainty (e.g., emulators). The framework should also make the modelling results more accessible and understandable to the practitioners and decision makers; Improve the existing infrastructure landscape (software, tools, data, adaptation of models to High-Performance Computing (HPC)), to support the delivery of global and regional climate projections and associated analysis (for which a part of the budget may be allocated, but not more than 30% of the total eligible costs). This should be complementary to efforts funded through the European Research Infrastructures, Euro-HPC Joint Undertaking, Digital Europe Programme and other sources. ESM simulations are intended as the core of the topic with links to other modelling activities. To maximise the policy relevance of the climate simulations delivered, the operationalisation framework and the scenarios should be developed in co-creation with policy makers (e.g., through advisory boards or other participatory procedures). When dealing with models, actions should promote the highest standards of transparency and openness, as much as possible going well beyond documentation and extending to aspects such as assumptions, protocols, code, and data that is managed in compliance with the FAIR principles [1] . They should envisage clustering activities with any other relevant projects (in [2] and outside of Horizon Europe) for cross-projects cooperation and exchange of results. Proposals should earmark the necessary resources for these purposes. As this endeavour should be supported by the research communities that continuously improve the modelling systems and related infrastructure, strong interaction and coordination is expected with the projects funded under previous calls of this Destination and other relevant projects on ESM, with the topic HORIZON-CL5-2025-03-D1-02 “Advancing Earth System Models to increase understanding of Earth system change”, and with the topic HORIZON-INFRA-2025-01-SERV-02 (area on Research infrastructure services to improve the understanding and prediction of future climate changes and its impacts). International cooperation is encouraged, in particular with the Global South [3] , to promote capacity and consensus building, for example, by training early career researchers from Global South countries (see specific conditions for financial support to third parties). Maximum total amount dedicated to these activities should not exceed EUR 1.000.000. [1] FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, Reusable). [2] For example, relevant projects funded under the Horizon Europe calls Climate sciences and responses. [3] In absence of a single formal definition of the Global South, the list of low - to middle- income countries automatically eligible for Horizon Europe funding should be used for this purpose – see the Horizon Europe List of Participating Countries on EU Funding and Tenders Portal for up-to-date information

CONDICOES DE ELEGIBILIDADE:
"> General conditions 1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes. Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System. 2. Eligible Countries described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes. A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide . 3. Other Eligible Conditions described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes. 4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes. 5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds are described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes. 5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual . 5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes. 6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants Beneficiaries may provide financial support to third parties. This support can be provided in the form of grants to researchers from the Global South countries[[In absence of a single formal definition of the Global South, the list of low- to middle-income countries automatically eligible for Horizon Europe funding should be used for this purpose – see the Horizon Europe List of Participating Countries on EU Funding and Tenders Portal for up-to-date information.]]. The maximum amount to be granted to an individual third party is EUR 60.000. Eligible costs will take the form of a lump sum as defined in the Decision of 7 July 2021 authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (2021-2027) – and in actions under the Research and Training Programme of the European Atomic Energy Community (2021-2025). [[This decision is available on the Funding and Tenders Portal, in the reference documents section for Horizon Europe, under ‘Simplified costs decisions’ or through this link: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/docs/2021-2027/horizon/guidance/ls-decision_he_en.pdf ]]. Beneficiaries will be subject to the following additional obligations regarding open science practices: Open access to any new modules, models or tools developed from scratch or substantially improved with the use of EU funding under the action must be ensured through documentation, availability of model code and input data developed under the action. described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes. Specific conditions described in the specific topic of the Work Programme Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA): Application form templates — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System Standard application form (HE RIA, IA) Standard application form (HE RIA IA Stage 1) &#xa0; Standard application form (HE CSA) &#xa0; Standard application form (HE CSA Stage 1) &#xa0; Standard application form (HE RI) &#xa0; Standard application form (HE COFUND) &#xa0; Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations &#xa0; Standard evaluation form (HE RIA, IA) &#xa0; Standard evaluation form (HE CSA) &#xa0; Standard evaluation form (HE RIA, IA and CSA Stage 1) &#xa0; Standard evaluation form (HE COFUND) &#xa0; Guidance HE Programme Guide &#xa0; Model Grant Agreements (MGA) HE MGA &#xa0; HE Unit MGA &#xa0; Lump Sum MGA &#xa0; Operating Grants MGA &#xa0; Framework Partnership Agreement FPA &#xa0; Call-specific instructions &#xa0; Detailed budget table (HE LS) &#xa0; Information on financial support to third parties (HE) &#xa0; Information on clinical studies (HE) &#xa0; Guidance: "Lump sums - what do I need to know?" Additional documents: HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 1. General Introduction HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 2. Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 3. Research Infrastructures HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 4. Health HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 5. Culture, creativity and inclusive society HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 6. Civil Security for Society HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 7. Digital, Industry and Space HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 8. Climate, Energy and Mobility &#xa0; HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 9. Food, Bioeconomy, Natural Resources, Agriculture and Environment &#xa0; HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 10. European Innovation Ecosystems (EIE) &#xa0; HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 11. Widening participation and strengthening the European Research Area &#xa0; HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 12. Missions &#xa0; HE Main Work Programme 2023–2025 – 13. General Annexes &#xa0; HE Programme Guide &#xa0; HE Framework Programme 2021/695 &#xa0; HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764 &#xa0; EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509 Decision authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment &#xa0; EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement &#xa0; Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual &#xa0; Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions &#xa0; Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement

INFORMACAO DE SUPORTE:
Online Manual is your guide on the procedures from proposal submission to managing your grant. Horizon Europe Programme Guide contains the detailed guidance to the structure, budget and political priorities of Horizon Europe. Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – find the answers to most frequently asked questions on submission of proposals, evaluation and grant management. Research Enquiry Service – ask questions about any aspect of European research in general and the EU Research Framework Programmes in particular. National Contact Points (NCPs) – get guidance, practical information and assistance on participation in Horizon Europe. There are also NCPs in many non-EU and non-associated countries (‘third-countries’). Enterprise Europe Network – contact your EEN national contact for advice to businesses with special focus on SMEs. The support includes guidance on the EU research funding. IT Helpdesk – contact the Funding & Tenders Portal IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc. European IPR Helpdesk assists you on intellectual property issues. CEN-CENELEC Research Helpdesk and ETSI Research Helpdesk – the European Standards Organisations advise you how to tackle standardisation in your project proposal. The European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for their recruitment – consult the general principles and requirements specifying the roles, responsibilities and entitlements of researchers, employers and funders of researchers. Partner Search help you find a partner organisation for your proposal.
