TITLE: R&I in Support of the Clean Industrial Deal: Decarbonisation of energy intensive industries (IA) (Processes4Planet and Clean Steel partnerships)
IDENTIFIER: HORIZON-CID-2027-01-01
CALL: HORIZON-CID-2027-01 - R&I in Support of the Clean Industrial Deal
PROGRAMME: Horizon Europe (HORIZON)
PUBLICATION DATE: 2025-12-12

BUDGET OVERVIEW:
  - 113071 | year  | budget  | projects expected 
  - 113070 | year  | budget  | projects expected 
MGA TYPES: HORIZON Action Grant Budget-Based
PROGRAMME DIVISION: Horizon Europe (HORIZON) > Global Challenges and European Industrial Competitiveness > Digital, Industry and Space

CONDITIONS:
">

General conditions

1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout

In order to include a business plan and market-readiness strategy (as part of the dissemination and exploitation activities), as outlined in the introduction to this Destination, the page limit in part B of the General Annexes is exceptionally extended to a total maximum of 60 pages.

﻿described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes.

Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System.

2. Eligible Countries

described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide.

3. Other Eligible Conditions

If projects use satellite-based earth observation, positioning, navigation and/or related timing data and services, beneficiaries must make use of Copernicus and/or Galileo/EGNOS (other data and services may additionally be used).

described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion

described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds

To contribute to a balanced portfolio covering the three technology areas described in the scope below, grants will be awarded to applications not only in order of ranking, but also at least to one (1) application that is the highest ranked for each area according to the main area selected in the application, provided that the applications attain all thresholds.

are described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes

are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual.

5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement

described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes.

6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants

The granting authority may, up to 4 years after the end of the action, object to a transfer of ownership or to the exclusive licensing of results, as set out in the specific provision of Annex 5.

described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes.

Specific conditions
 
described in the [specific topic of the Work Programme]

Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA):
 
Application form templates — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System

Standard application form (HE RIA, IA)

Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations 

Standard evaluation form (HE RIA, IA) 

Guidance

HE Programme Guide 

Model Grant Agreements (MGA)

HE MGA 

Call-specific instructions 

Information on financial support to third parties (HE) 

Information on clinical studies (HE) 

Additional documents:
 
HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 1. General Introduction

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 6. Civil Security for Society

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 7. Digital, Industry and Space

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 8. Climate, Energy and Mobility

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 14. Horizontal Activities

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 15. General Annexes

HE Programme Guide

HE Framework Programme 2021/695

HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764

EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509

Decision authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme

Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment

EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement 

Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual 

Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions 

Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement


DESCRIPTION:
Expected Outcome:

Proposals are expected to contribute to all the following expected outcomes:

 - Accelerate the use of innovative technologies to decarbonise industrial processes and bring to the market more cost-effective clean products to strengthen the competitiveness, sustainability (including biodiversity), and resilience of EU industries;

 - Create new innovative first-of-a-kind operational demonstrators and/or optimise newly installed industrial decarbonisation solutions in Europe; and

 - Demonstrate the market readiness of the envisaged future clean products and their innovative processes via a credible business plan and an exploitation strategy for industrialisation, including market-tested use cases.
 
Scope:

The Clean Industrial Deal aims to secure the EU as an attractive location for manufacturing, including for energy-intensive industries, and to promote clean tech and new circular business models in order to meet Europe’s ambitious decarbonisation and climate neutrality targets. It focuses primarily on the competitive decarbonisation of EU industry and on the production of clean technologies in the EU.

The following three technology areas on energy intensive industries having a strong and promising growth potential in Europe are in scope of this call:

 - Managing of carbon cycle (CCU and/or CCUS): further optimization and demonstration of solutions for the capture, utilization or storage of CO2 and/or CO from installations of the energy intensive industries, with significant reduction of energy input (per ton of CO2/CO) related to capture rate and purity compared to current available technologies (target figure 30% reduction), and potential of commercialization of the decarbonized products with respect to LCA (compared to state of the art), market size, and cost.

 - Clean energy usage in production (electrification of the processes, decarbonated production, integration of alternative clean energy carriers – e.g. hydrogen – and technologies, on-site renewable energy storage solutions, usage and upgrade of waste heat): supporting major improvements of clean energy usage in the energy intensive industries until 2035.

 - Circularity and resource efficiency (material, energy, water) of production processes: improvement by 30% until 2035 compared to current industrial value, with technological solutions which are commercially viable; and significant reduction of the overall raw material consumption, energy input, freshwater intake, impact on ecosystems and emissions, through circular value networks that convert industrial side-streams and/or end-of-use waste to new feedstock for which no low-CO2-technologies currently exist. Solutions must have an overall positive LCA and remain commercially viable under the expected regulatory and framework conditions at the end of the project.
 
Proposals should explicitly select one main area but can also address in an integrated way a combination of these three areas within an industrial sector, provided that it is innovative and can lead to low carbon solutions. The choice of the specific technologies addressed in the proposal is left to the project applicants who should include a thorough justification of the choices both in technological and business terms. Use of advanced, and safe and sustainable materials and processes could be also addressed as part of the selected proposals.

Proposals are expected to:

 - demonstrate an adequate integration of relevant technologies in support of the Clean Industrial Deal. The integration can either be demonstrated in a direct (e.g. reduction of greenhouse emissions of a process) or an indirect (e.g. production of a new green/clean product) manner. Reduction or avoidance of harmful pollutants and impact on biodiversity may also be considered, as relevant.[1] The use of relevant results of R&I projects previously or ongoing funded at EU, national or regional level is encouraged.

 - show industrial leadership in the deployment after the project. To ensure market readiness and effective collaboration amongst relevant stakeholders, the consortium should be industry driven and composed of a preferably small and manageable number of participants, and its size should be justified. The participation of SMEs is encouraged.
 
The draft dissemination, exploitation and communication plan is expected to include a sound and convincing business plan and market-readiness strategy (cf. intro). These should address how to prepare and support the deployment of the proposed tech solution across relevant EU industrial sectors, and/or how to ensure a high potential for market uptake through further private/public investment (including relevant EU deployment programmes, such as the Innovation Fund). They should include a comprehensive analysis of the critical barriers (technological and non-technological) for the successful market deployment and the corresponding plan to tackle them before 2030.

Proposals are expected to include a clear go/no go moment ahead of the contracting and demonstration phase. Before this go/no-go moment, the project is expected to deliver detailed engineering plans, a techno-economic assessment, all needed permits for the demonstrator, a complete business plan and market-readiness strategy, identifying clearly the industrial partner(s) that will lead the deployment. Proposals are also expected to provide a clear and credible pathway to obtaining all needed permits for the demonstration phase of the project.

Taking into account that the Clean Industrial Deal focuses on clean tech and decarbonisation of energy-intensive industry , projects funded under this topic will be encouraged to develop synergies and coordinate on similar funded projects under the topics HORIZON-CID-2026-01-02: R&I in Support of the Clean Industrial Deal: Clean Technologies for Climate Action and HORIZON- HORIZON-CID-2027-01-02: R&I in Support of the Clean Industrial Deal: Clean Technologies for Climate Action under this call, as well as with related projects funded under the Processess4Planet, and Clean Steel and other European Partnerships.

This topic implements the co-programmed European partnerships Processes4Planet and Clean Steel.

null

Activities are expected to start at TRL 6 and achieve TRL 7 to 8 by the end of the project – see General Annex B.

[1]


SUPPORT INFO:
Online Manual is your guide on the procedures from proposal submission to managing your grant.

Horizon Europe Programme Guide contains the detailed guidance to the structure, budget and political priorities of Horizon Europe.

Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – find the answers to most frequently asked questions on submission of proposals, evaluation and grant management.

Research Enquiry Service – ask questions about any aspect of European research in general and the EU Research Framework Programmes in particular.

National Contact Points (NCPs) – get guidance, practical information and assistance on participation in Horizon Europe. There are also NCPs in many non-EU and non-associated countries (‘third-countries’).

Enterprise Europe Network – contact your EEN national contact for advice to businesses with special focus on SMEs. The support includes guidance on the EU research funding.

IT Helpdesk – contact the Funding & Tenders Portal IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc.

European IPR Helpdesk assists you on intellectual property issues.

CEN-CENELEC Research Helpdesk and ETSI Research Helpdesk – the European Standards Organisations advise you how to tackle standardisation in your project proposal.

The European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for their recruitment – consult the general principles and requirements specifying the roles, responsibilities and entitlements of researchers, employers and funders of researchers.

Partner Search help you find a partner organisation for your proposal.
