TITLE: Artificial Intelligence for Cybersecurity applications
IDENTIFIER: HORIZON-CL3-2027-02-CS-ECCC-01
CALL: HORIZON-CL3-2027-02-CS-ECCC - Indirectly Managed Action by the ECCC (2027)
PROGRAMME: Horizon Europe (HORIZON)
PUBLICATION DATE: 2025-12-12

BUDGET OVERVIEW:
  - 113425 | year  | budget  | projects expected 
  - 113424 | year  | budget  | projects expected 
  - 113423 | year  | budget  | projects expected 
  - 113422 | year  | budget  | projects expected 
MGA TYPES: HORIZON Lump Sum Grant
PROGRAMME DIVISION: Horizon Europe (HORIZON) > Global Challenges and European Industrial Competitiveness > Civil Security for Society > Cybersecurity

KEYWORDS: Artificial Intelligence & Decision support, Artificial intelligence, Artificial intelligence, intelligent systems, multi agent systems, Cybersecurity Domains, Security Management and Governance, Threats and vulnerabilities modelling

CONDITIONS:
">

General conditions

1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout

described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes.

Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System.

2. Eligible Countries

described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide.

3. Other Eligible Conditions

In order to achieve the expected outcomes, and safeguard the Union’s strategic assets, interests, autonomy, and security, participation in this topic is limited to legal entities established in Member States and Associated Countries. In order to guarantee the protection of the strategic interests of the Union and its Member States, entities established in an eligible country listed above, but which are directly or indirectly controlled by a non-eligible country or by a non-eligible country entity, shall not participate in the action.

described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion

described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds

are described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes

are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual.

5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement

described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes.

6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants

Eligible costs will take the form of a lump sum as defined in the Decision of 7 July 2021 authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (2021-2027) – and in actions under the Research and Training Programme of the European Atomic Energy Community (2021-2025) [[This decision is available on the Funding and Tenders Portal, in the reference documents section for Horizon Europe, under ‘Simplified costs decisions’ or through this link: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/docs/2021-2027/horizon/guidance/ls-decision_he_en.pdf]].

described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes.

Specific conditions
 
described in the [specific topic of the Work Programme]

Some activities resulting from this topic may involve using classified background and/or producing of security sensitive results (EUCI and SEN). Please refer to the related provisions in section B Security — EU classified and sensitive information of the General Annexes.

Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA):
 
Application form templates — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System

Standard application form (HE RIA, IA)

Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations

Standard evaluation form (HE RIA, IA) 

Guidance

HE Programme Guide 

Model Grant Agreements (MGA)

Lump Sum MGA 

Call-specific instructions 

Detailed budget table (HE LS) 

Guidance: "Lump sums - what do I need to know?"

Ownership Control Declaration

Information on Security issues (Security section)

Additional documents:
 
HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 1. General Introduction

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 6. Civil Security for Society

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 15. General Annexes

HE Programme Guide

HE Framework Programme 2021/695

HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764

EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509

Decision authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme

Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment

EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement 

Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual 

Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions 

Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement


DESCRIPTION:
Expected Outcome:

Proposals are expected to contribute to one or more of the following:

 - AI-driven solutions for real-time cyber threat detection;

 - Advanced adaptive AI systems that evolve with dynamic cybersecurity challenges;

 - Contribute to drastically reduce reaction time for the recovery of systems. 
 
Scope:

Artificial Intelligence is increasingly utilised in cybersecurity for threat detection, incident response, and adaptive defence mechanisms. However, AI-driven systems themselves are susceptible to adversarial manipulation and bias. This topic aims to advance AI-based cybersecurity applications while ensuring that AI-driven solutions remain resilient, transparent, and compliant with regulatory frameworks such as the AI Act. In this context, the topic explores the role of all types of AI, including generative AI, in cybersecurity applications, including automated threat detection, adaptive cyber defence, and AI-driven cyber threat intelligence. Proposals should develop solutions for trustworthy AI in cybersecurity contexts including addressing adversarial AI risks, in compliance with the provisions of the AI Act. The topic is expected to:

 - Develop AI-driven solutions and tools for real-time cyber threat detection. Investigating novel machine learning techniques to detect anomalies, malicious activity, and AI-powered cyber threats in real time, improving situational awareness and response times.

 - Develop adaptive AI systems capable of evolving with dynamic cybersecurity challenges. Exploring AI techniques that continuously learn from new cyber threats, adapting to emerging attack patterns, while maintaining robustness and explainability.

 - Support the future enhancements of Security Operation Centres/Cyber Hubs. Developing AI-enhanced SOC frameworks that integrate predictive analytics, automation, and threat intelligence to strengthen proactive defence measures.


SUPPORT INFO:
For guidance and support related to this call, we recommend that you first contact the National Cybersecurity Coordination Centres (NCC) in your country, where available. The Network of NCCs includes one national centre from each of the 27 EU Member States plus Iceland and Norway. You may also address your questions to the ECCC Applicants Direct Contact Centre at applicants@eccc.europa.eu .

Online Manual is your guide on the procedures from proposal submission to managing your grant.

Horizon Europe Programme Guide contains the detailed guidance to the structure, budget and political priorities of Horizon Europe.

Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – find the answers to most frequently asked questions on submission of proposals, evaluation and grant management.

Research Enquiry Service – ask questions about any aspect of European research in general and the EU Research Framework Programmes in particular.

National Contact Points (NCPs) – get guidance, practical information and assistance on participation in Horizon Europe. There are also NCPs in many non-EU and non-associated countries (‘third-countries’).

Enterprise Europe Network – contact your EEN national contact for advice to businesses with special focus on SMEs. The support includes guidance on the EU research funding.

IT Helpdesk – contact the Funding & Tenders Portal IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc.

European IPR Helpdesk assists you on intellectual property issues.

CEN-CENELEC Research Helpdesk and ETSI Research Helpdesk – the European Standards Organisations advise you how to tackle standardisation in your project proposal.

The European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for their recruitment – consult the general principles and requirements specifying the roles, responsibilities and entitlements of researchers, employers and funders of researchers.

Partner Search help you find a partner organisation for your proposal.
