INSTRUMENTO: Disruptive Technologies and Innovative Concepts for Energy Saving Onboard of long-distance ships (ZEWT Partnership)
IDENTIFICADOR: HORIZON-CL5-2026-06-Two-Stage-D5-10
AVISO: HORIZON-CL5-2026-06-Two-Stage
CALL TITLE: MOBILITY
PROGRAMA: {'id': 43108390, 'abbreviation': 'HORIZON', 'description': 'Horizon Europe (HORIZON)'}
DIVISAO:  |  |  |  |  | 
TIPO DE ACAO: HORIZON Lump Sum Grant
DOTACAO: 2026: EUR 15,000,000
2026: EUR 7,500,000
PRAZO: 2026-04-14 | 2026-10-08 | 2026-04-14 | 2026-10-08
PALAVRAS-CHAVE: 

DESCRICAO:
Expected Outcome: Project results are expected to contribute to all the following expected outcomes: Development of novel and disruptive technologies and innovative concepts that demonstrate at least 25% energy savings for long distance shipping, compared to 2008 levels. Established methodology for assessing the energy savings from the proposed solutions, considering the implementation of the IMO GHG strategy and of the FuelEU Maritime Regulation. Proven scalability and replicability of the developed technologies and concepts to various ship types, operational profiles and navigational routes. Assess the economic viability, environmental and climate impacts of the technologies and innovative concepts. Defined implications and impacts of the proposed solutions regarding safety and operational aspects, also addressing competences and skills issues for the adoption and operation of such technologies. Consider AI-based and digital twin features for optimisation and energy management aspects. Relevant improvements should not be considered as part of the at least 25% energy savings target. Scope: Energy consumption of long-distance shipping should be reduced significantly to achieve sustainable worldwide trade. To achieve a more sustainable and environmentally friendly shipping industry, it is essential to continue developing disruptive technologies, advanced materials, and innovative concepts that can significantly reduce energy consumption of long-distance shipping. The objective of this topic is to support solutions for propulsion and non-propulsion energy consumption that aim to achieve at least at least 25% energy savings in long distance shipping as compared to 2008 levels, through the development and integration of standalone solutions. These technologies include (but are not limited to) active or passive increased performance solutions, novel propulsion systems, augmented propulsion technologies capitalizing also on ship motions, hull performance enhancements and the use of advanced materials which can further enhance energy efficiency and reduce the environmental impact of vessels. Any fuel-related proposals should only consider renewable low and zero-carbon fuels. These technologies and concepts should be applicable to various types of ships, including ro-pax, container ships, bulk carriers, and tankers. Proposals are expected to address all the following aspects: Development and demonstration at TRL 4-5 of novel, high-uncertainty but high-reward technologies that significantly reduce energy consumption in long distance shipping. Development of various ship concepts, conducting replication studies for different case scenarios and modelling the real overall energy savings of the solutions and concepts developed. Development of methodologies measuring the impact of the energy efficiency achieved on the GHG intensity and the impact on air pollution of the energy used for propulsion specifically for long distance shipping, with a focus on emission reductions, also facilitating the introduction of such technologies under the scope of LCA guidelines and FuelEU Maritime, and improving the EEDI, EEXI and CII performance where relevant. Consider links with digital twin and AI-based optimisation aspects for the considered technologies (e.g., adaptive and model-predictive control), including the necessary sensing systems, to expand the system’s future capacities. Model the economic viability of the developed technologies, considering initial investment, operational savings, maintenance costs, and potential financial incentives, to assess the economic feasibility while also facilitating decision-making in the design process. Assessment of the safety and environmental implications of the solutions, including technical and operational risks, possible impacts to ships, ports and other land infrastructure. Ensure appropriate sustainability of the action outputs by elaborating on a technology development roadmap and by exploring business cases. Proposals are expected to explain the contribution of their objectives, results, IP management and exploitation strategy to the EU added value creation and strategic autonomy throughout the supply and value chain, including competitiveness of the EU waterborne industry, enhancement of the EU’s R&I capacity, technological know-how capabilities and human capital, and resilience of the EU industrial and manufacturing base. Proposals are encouraged to include synergies with shipyards, equipment manufacturers and providers, including start-ups and SMEs, located and/or manufacturing in the EU and EEA. This topic implements the co-programmed European Partnership on ‘Zero Emission Waterborne Transport’ (ZEWT). As such, projects resulting from this topic will be expected to report on results to the European Partnership ‘Zero Emission Waterborne Transport’ (ZEWT) in support of the monitoring of its KPIs. null Activities are expected to achieve TRL 4-5 by the end of the project – see General Annex B. Activities may start at any TRL.

CONDICOES DE ELEGIBILIDADE:
"> General conditions 1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout Applicants submitting a proposal for a blind evaluation (see General Annex F) must not disclose their organisation names, acronyms, logos nor names of personnel in the proposal abstract and Part B of their first-stage application (see General Annex E). ﻿ described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes. Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System. 2. Eligible Countries described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes. A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide . 3. Other Eligible Conditions If projects use satellite-based earth observation, positioning, navigation and/or related timing data and services, beneficiaries must make use of Copernicus and/or Galileo/EGNOS (other data and services may additionally be used). described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes. 4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes. 5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds The first-stage proposals of this topic will be evaluated blindly. are described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes. 5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual . 5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes. 6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants The granting authority may, up to 4 years after the end of the action, object to a transfer of ownership or to the exclusive licensing of results, as set out in the specific provision of Annex 5. Eligible costs will take the form of a lump sum as defined in the Decision of 7 July 2021 authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (2021-2027) – and in actions under the Research and Training Programme of the European Atomic Energy Community (2021-2025) [[This decision is available on the Funding and Tenders Portal, in the reference documents section for Horizon Europe, under ‘Simplified costs decisions’ or through this link: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/docs/2021-2027/horizon/guidance/ls-decision_he_en.pdf ]]. described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes. Specific conditions Not applicable. Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA): Application form templates — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System Standard application form (HE RIA IA Stage 1 BLIND) Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations Standard evaluation form (HE RIA, IA and CSA Stage 1 BLIND) Guidance HE Programme Guide &#xa0; Model Grant Agreements (MGA) Lump Sum MGA &#xa0; Call-specific instructions &#xa0; Detailed budget table (HE LS) &#xa0; Guidance: "Lump sums - what do I need to know?" Additional documents: HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 1. General Introduction HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 8. Climate, Energy and Mobility HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 15. General Annexes HE Programme Guide HE Framework Programme 2021/695 HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764 EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509 Decision authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual &#xa0; Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions &#xa0; Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement

INFORMACAO DE SUPORTE:
Online Manual is your guide on the procedures from proposal submission to managing your grant. Horizon Europe Programme Guide contains the detailed guidance to the structure, budget and political priorities of Horizon Europe. Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – find the answers to most frequently asked questions on submission of proposals, evaluation and grant management. Research Enquiry Service – ask questions about any aspect of European research in general and the EU Research Framework Programmes in particular. National Contact Points (NCPs) – get guidance, practical information and assistance on participation in Horizon Europe. There are also NCPs in many non-EU and non-associated countries (‘third-countries’). Enterprise Europe Network – contact your EEN national contact for advice to businesses with special focus on SMEs. The support includes guidance on the EU research funding. IT Helpdesk – contact the Funding & Tenders Portal IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc. European IPR Helpdesk assists you on intellectual property issues. CEN-CENELEC Research Helpdesk and ETSI Research Helpdesk – the European Standards Organisations advise you how to tackle standardisation in your project proposal. The European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for their recruitment – consult the general principles and requirements specifying the roles, responsibilities and entitlements of researchers, employers and funders of researchers. Partner Search help you find a partner organisation for your proposal.
