TITLE: Re-imagining the creative economy: the interplay between the cultural and creative sectors and industries and the social economy
TOPIC CODE: HORIZON-CL2-2027-01-HERITAGE-05
CALL IDENTIFIER: HORIZON-CL2-2027-01
CALL TITLE: Culture, Creativity and Inclusive Society - 2027

KEYWORDS: Business model innovation, Capacity building, Economic and socio-economic evaluation, economic-financial modelling, Entrepreneurship, Gender in social sciences, Knowledge transfer, Labour economics, Policy making and economics, Regional development, Social enterprises, Social innovation, Social policies, work and welfare, Social sciences, interdisciplinary, Training

=== DESCRIPTION ===
Expected Outcome:

Projects should contribute to all of the following expected outcomes:

- Evidence-based policy frameworks and guidelines promoting the convergence of creative and social economy models.
- Case studies, indicators, and evaluation methods to measure the social and economic impact of CCSI in social economy frameworks. These tools are provided for policymakers and stakeholders, with areas for improvement identified.
- Hybrid CCSI business models that incorporate social economy principles, balancing profitability and social responsibility, showcasing scalable examples across different regions and sectors.
- Workforce development strategies addressing precarious employment in creative sectors, including alternative employment structures, skill-sharing, and professional development, and enhancing socio-economic diversity and mobility in creative industries, using gender-sensitive and intersectional approaches to address inequalities. 
 Scope:

The intersection of social economy[[ The European Commission defines social economy in the Communication ‘Building an economy that works for people: an action plan for the social economy’, COM(2021) 778 final, p. 5 "The social economy covers entities sharing the following main common principles and features: the primacy of people as well as social and/or environmental purpose over profit, the reinvestment of most of the profits and surpluses to carry out activities in the interest of members/users (“collective interest”) or society at large (“general interest”) and democratic and/or participatory governance. Traditionally, the term social economy refers to four main types of entities providing goods and services to their members or society at large: cooperatives, mutual benefit societies, associations (including charities), and foundations.” […]]] and the cultural and creative sectors and industries (CCSI) provides fertile ground for advancing sustainable and inclusive development across public and private domains. Enhancing synergies between private initiatives (impact-oriented enterprises, cooperatives, associations) and public policy can unlock innovative models, fostering hybrid approaches that blend public mission with entrepreneurial strategies. Studies highlight the role of social economy entities in CCSI for local development through ecological approaches, territorial clustering, and community engagement, as well as for improving employment and working conditions and promoting inclusive growth[1].

The European Commission’s 2021 Action Plan for the social economy, complemented by the EU Social Economy Gateway[2], and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) underscore the CCSI potential for economic growth, job creation, and innovation. The OECD further notes that integrating social economy models in culture and creativity can stabilise employment, improve working conditions in creative industries, which often face precarious employment and limited access to credit, and foster sustainability, innovation and social cohesion[3]. In April 2023, the UN General Assembly recognised the social economy as critical to inclusive and sustainable economies[4].

Embracing social economy principles in CCSI can address major societal challenges such as income inequality and social cohesion, while driving culture- and creativity-led innovation and inclusive growth across Europe.

Reimagining the creative economy requires CCSIs to engage with broader societal and economic frameworks. This topic aims to enhance the transformative potential of CCSIs’ interplay with the social economy in Europe. Proposals are expected to investigate, develop, and test innovative frameworks and models that leverage social economy principles in culture and creativity to drive social impact, economic sustainability, quality jobs creation, and vibrant, resilient cultural and creative sectors. By moving beyond traditional market logics and adopting cooperative, participatory and socially oriented models, proposals will identify scalable strategies for ethical business, revenue diversification, and embedding social purpose in creative innovation. This may include developing technical or legal assistance and support services enabling CCSIs to access shared resources, enhance resilience, and build community capital. These efforts will empower CCSIs to catalyse inclusive, sustainable transformation and position Europe as a leader in a fairer creative economy.

Key areas of focus are expected to be addressed through inter-, multi- and trans-disciplinary approaches (taking into account – among others – contributions by SSH disciplines), including cross-sectoral cooperation and stakeholder involvement:

1. Sustainable Growth and Quality Employment

- Analyse social economy models’ impact on CCSI sustainability, resilience, and growth, particularly during crises.
- Examine how social economy principles address precarious employment, support alternative employment, and foster professional development, while contributing to creative entrepreneurial ecosystems for regional development that strengthen local economies.
- Explore financing mechanisms, fiscal incentives and solutions to sector-specific challenges, to incentivize social reinvestment.
- Investigate how social economy enterprises address socio-economic diversity, income inequality, inclusivity, and promote innovation including within CCSIs.[5]
 2. Innovation, local development and social impact

- Investigate how CCSI social enterprises drive innovation (including social innovation), social participation, and empower marginalized groups and groups in vulnerable situations, such as persons with disabilities.
- Highlight social entrepreneurship’s role in catalysing new business models and value-driven practices addressing societal challenges
- Assess CCSI social economy enterprises contribution to local development, social cohesion, and responsible consumption.
 3. Policy and comparative studies

- Analyse and compare policy frameworks supporting the convergence of creative economy and social economy models in the EU and beyond.
 Identify best practices and propose recommendations for integrated strategies enhancing sustainable, inclusive development and innovation.

[1] Among others, A. Costantini, Social Economy Enterprises and Cultural and Creative Industries. Observations and best practices, Bruxelles, Diesis 2018 CCIs-SEEs_-FINAL_2018.pdf

[2] About the EU Social Economy Gateway - European Commission

[3] The Culture Fix. Creative people, places and industries (2022) Full Report | OECD; Economic and social impact of cultural and creative sectors. Note for Italy G20 Presidency Culture Working Group

Economic and social impact of cultural and creative sectors | OECD

[4] Promoting the social and solidarity economy for sustainable development A-77-L60.pdf

[5] The 2021 study "Social mobility in the Creative Economy: Rebuilding and levelling up?" by the Creative Industries Policy and Evidence Centre (PEC) provides insights into class imbalances in the creative industries, highlights the need for systemic change to address deep-rooted structural inequalities in the creative industries and proposes a ten-point action plan for enhancing social mobility in the creative economy Social mobility in the Creative Economy: Rebuilding and levelling up?

=== CONDITIONS ===
">General conditions

1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout

As described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes.

Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System.

2. Eligible Countries

As described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide.

3. Other Eligible Conditions

As described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion

As described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds

As described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes

As described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual.

5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement

As described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes.

6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants

The granting authority may, up to 4 years after the end of the action, object to a transfer of ownership or to the exclusive licensing of results, as set out in the specific provision of Annex 5.

Eligible costs will take the form of a lump sum as defined in the Decision of 7 July 2021 authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (2021-2027) – and in actions under the Research and Training Programme of the European Atomic Energy Community (2021-2025) [[This decision is available on the Funding and Tenders Portal, in the reference documents section for Horizon Europe, under ‘Simplified costs decisions’ or through this link: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/docs/2021-2027/horizon/guidance/ls-decision_he_en.pdf]].

In addition, as described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes.

Specific conditions

 As described in the specific topic of the Work Programme.

Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA):

 Application form templates — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System

Standard application form (HE RIA, IA)

Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations 

Standard evaluation form (HE RIA, IA)&#xa0;

Guidance

HE Programme Guide&#xa0;

Model Grant Agreements (MGA)

Lump Sum MGA&#xa0;

Call-specific instructions&#xa0;

Detailed budget table (HE LS)&#xa0;

Guidance: "Lump sums - what do I need to know?"

Additional documents:

 HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 1. General Introduction

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 5. Culture, Creativity and Inclusive Society

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 15. General Annexes

HE Programme Guide

HE Framework Programme 2021/695

HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764

EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509

Decision authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme

Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment

EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement

Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual 

Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions&#xa0;

Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement

=== SUPPORT INFO ===
Online Manual is your guide on the procedures from proposal submission to managing your grant.

Horizon Europe Programme Guide contains the detailed guidance to the structure, budget and political priorities of Horizon Europe.

Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – find the answers to most frequently asked questions on submission of proposals, evaluation and grant management.

Research Enquiry Service – ask questions about any aspect of European research in general and the EU Research Framework Programmes in particular.

National Contact Points (NCPs) – get guidance, practical information and assistance on participation in Horizon Europe. There are also NCPs in many non-EU and non-associated countries (‘third-countries’).

Enterprise Europe Network – contact your EEN national contact for advice to businesses with special focus on SMEs. The support includes guidance on the EU research funding.

IT Helpdesk – contact the Funding & Tenders Portal IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc.

European IPR Helpdesk assists you on intellectual property issues.

CEN-CENELEC Research Helpdesk and ETSI Research Helpdesk – the European Standards Organisations advise you how to tackle standardisation in your project proposal.

The European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for their recruitment – consult the general principles and requirements specifying the roles, responsibilities and entitlements of researchers, employers and funders of researchers.

Partner Search help you find a partner organisation for your proposal.