INSTRUMENTO: Closing knowledge gaps on Earth system science in support of global and regional assessments and climate policy
IDENTIFICADOR: HORIZON-CL5-2026-08-Two-Stage-D1-06
AVISO: HORIZON-CL5-2026-08-Two-Stage
CALL TITLE: CLIMATE
PROGRAMA: {'id': 43108390, 'abbreviation': 'HORIZON', 'description': 'Horizon Europe (HORIZON)'}
DIVISAO:  |  |  | 
TIPO DE ACAO: HORIZON Lump Sum Grant
DOTACAO:
2026: EUR 45,000,000
PRAZO: 2026-04-15 | 2026-10-08
PALAVRAS-CHAVE: 

DESCRICAO:
Expected Outcome: Project results are expected to contribute to some of the following expected outcomes: Improved quality and reduced uncertainty of global and regional climate change projections; Critical knowledge and data gaps in Earth system science as identified in the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) and other authoritative sources, are addressed, ensuring that future climate assessments are grounded in the most comprehensive and up-to-date scientific evidence; New climate science evidence is generated that is relevant for policy needs and for informing climate action. Scope: The global community’s ability to mitigate and adapt to climate change requires the continuous advancement of climate science and related disciplines. International climate policy is informed primarily by the assessments made by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), which provides the most comprehensive and authoritative evaluation of the state of knowledge on climate science, including the Earth’s climate system and its expected changes under different scenarios. Despite the exponential increase of available data, other evidence and knowledge accumulated on these issues, there remain significant gaps in our understanding of key issues and processes. These may include factors such as insufficient or divergent evidence, low confidence findings or high uncertainties. Some of these gaps are identified in AR6 (specifically, in Working Group I contribution), “The Next Frontier for Climate Change Science” [1] and other relevant sources. Moreover, science has progressed since the closing of the evidence base used for AR6, raising new questions and avenues for inquiry. Proposals under this topic should seek to narrow the knowledge gaps in the realm of Earth system science (understood here as the scope of Working Group I of the IPCC), offering flexibility for applicants to define the specific research areas targeted. Proposals are expected to focus on issues clearly within the scope of Cluster 5, Destination 1, and not prominently addressed by other topics of the 2025 and 2026-2027 Work Programmes, encouraging new scientific insights and approaches, and the involvement of researchers and entities new to Horizon Europe. Successful proposals are expected to enhance the scientific foundations and inform scientific assessments in a way that ensures they are comprehensive, accurate, and relevant for decision-makers. Proposals should clearly identify the knowledge gap(s) they seek to address, substantiate why recent and ongoing research efforts are unlikely to sufficiently address the issue, explain how the proposed action is expected to contribute to the advancement of Earth system science and identify policy relevance of the research proposed. International cooperation in the context of IPCC, WCRP [2] and GCOS [3] is strongly encouraged where relevant. Proposals indicating use of satellite remote sensing data and derived products are encouraged to collaborate with projects selected under ESA’s FutureEO programme and the EC-ESA Earth System Science Initiative (ESSI) to facilitate access to and uptake of satellite data products and related tools or methodologies. They should dedicate resources for collaborative actions. [1] The next frontier for climate change science - Publications Office of the EU [2] https://www.wcrp-climate.org/ [3] https://gcos.wmo.int/site/global-climate-observing-system-gcos

CONDICOES DE ELEGIBILIDADE:
"> General conditions 1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout Applicants submitting a proposal for a blind evaluation (see General Annex F) must not disclose their organisation names, acronyms, logos nor names of personnel in the proposal abstract and Part B of their first-stage application (see General Annex E). described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes. Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System. 2. Eligible Countries described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes. A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide . 3. Other Eligible Conditions If projects use satellite-based earth observation, positioning, navigation and/or related timing data and services, beneficiaries must make use of Copernicus and/or Galileo/EGNOS (other data and services may additionally be used). described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes. 4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes. 5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds The first-stage proposals of this topic will be evaluated blindly. are described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes. 5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual . 5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes. 6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants Eligible costs will take the form of a lump sum as defined in the Decision of 7 July 2021 authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (2021-2027) – and in actions under the Research and Training Programme of the European Atomic Energy Community (2021-2025) [[This decision is available on the Funding and Tenders Portal, in the reference documents section for Horizon Europe, under ‘Simplified costs decisions’ or through this link: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/docs/2021-2027/horizon/guidance/ls-decision_he_en.pdf ]]. described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes. Specific conditions described in the [specific topic of the Work Programme] Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA): Application form templates — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System Standard application form (HE RIA IA Stage 1 BLIND) Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations Standard evaluation form (HE RIA, IA and CSA Stage 1 BLIND) Guidance HE Programme Guide &#xa0; Model Grant Agreements (MGA) HE MGA &#xa0; Lump Sum MGA &#xa0; Call-specific instructions &#xa0; Detailed budget table (HE LS) &#xa0; Guidance: "Lump sums - what do I need to know?" Additional documents: HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 1. General Introduction HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 8. Climate, Energy and Mobility HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 14. Horizontal Activities HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 15. General Annexes HE Programme Guide HE Framework Programme 2021/695 HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764 EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509 Decision authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual &#xa0; Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions &#xa0; Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement

INFORMACAO DE SUPORTE:
Online Manual is your guide on the procedures from proposal submission to managing your grant. Horizon Europe Programme Guide contains the detailed guidance to the structure, budget and political priorities of Horizon Europe. Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – find the answers to most frequently asked questions on submission of proposals, evaluation and grant management. Research Enquiry Service – ask questions about any aspect of European research in general and the EU Research Framework Programmes in particular. National Contact Points (NCPs) – get guidance, practical information and assistance on participation in Horizon Europe. There are also NCPs in many non-EU and non-associated countries (‘third-countries’). Enterprise Europe Network – contact your EEN national contact for advice to businesses with special focus on SMEs. The support includes guidance on the EU research funding. IT Helpdesk – contact the Funding & Tenders Portal IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc. European IPR Helpdesk assists you on intellectual property issues. CEN-CENELEC Research Helpdesk and ETSI Research Helpdesk – the European Standards Organisations advise you how to tackle standardisation in your project proposal. The European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for their recruitment – consult the general principles and requirements specifying the roles, responsibilities and entitlements of researchers, employers and funders of researchers. Partner Search help you find a partner organisation for your proposal.
