HORIZON-CL5-2027-03-D5-15
Title: Prospective evaluation of nuclear power potential for shipping (ZEWT Partnership)
Call Identifier: HORIZON-CL5-2027-03
Programme: Horizon Europe (HORIZON)
Status: Forthcoming
Type of Action: HORIZON-CSA HORIZON Coordination and Support Actions
Budget: EUR 2,000,000 (2027)
Expected Grants: 1
Contribution: EUR 2,000,000 (min and max)
Planned Opening: May 15, 2027
Submission Deadline: December 12, 2027
Submission Model: Single-stage
Funding Model: Lump Sum Grant (HORIZON-AG-LS)

DESCRIPTION - EXPECTED OUTCOME:
Project results are expected to contribute to all the following expected outcomes:
1. Drafting of a R&I roadmap towards deploying nuclear power in commercial shipping, including small modular reactors (SMRs) and other advanced nuclear technologies (e.g. complementing the latest European Industrial Alliance on SMRs technology roadmap), including identification of research gaps, infrastructures and future innovation needs.
2. Mapping of relevant regulatory regimes nationally, regionally and internationally for the use of nuclear-powered shipping, including recommendations on regulatory frameworks and international cooperation.
3. Development of scenarios for the use of the technology, including potential damage scenarios.
4. The implications for National Energy and Climate Plans and National Air Pollution Control Programmes as well as water pollution policies required by EU legislative framework.
5. Assessment of total cost of ownership for the deployment of current and potential technologies.
6. Development of safety, training and operational guidelines for nuclear-powered ships.

SCOPE:
Nuclear propulsion has the potential to reduce emissions of air pollutants and to decarbonize the shipping sector, producing zero GHG tank-to-wake emissions and low upstream well-to-tank emissions. A coordinated effort among various stakeholders including industry partners, research performing organisations, NGOs, the European Commission, the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) should help evaluate such prospective potential.

The main objectives are to assess the feasibility, safety, and environmental impact of using nuclear power for shipping to achieve zero-emission of GHG, air and water pollutants in maritime transport. Following a preliminary assessment and literature review, as well as detailed technical and economic studies, regulatory and technical recommendations should be developed, along with a review of on-going pilot projects aimed at demonstrating the feasibility of nuclear-powered vessels.

Actions should address all the following aspects:

1. Technical Feasibility: (a) To assess the suitability of SMRs and other nuclear technologies for maritime use; (b) To evaluate any integration challenges with existing and potential new ship designs, including modular designs; (c) To study the lifecycle of nuclear-powered vessels, including construction, operation, and decommissioning.

2. Economic Viability: (a) To conduct cost-benefit analyses comparing nuclear-powered shipping to conventional and renewable low and zero-carbon fuel options, taking into account the long-term availability of fuel and the cost of disposal of residues; (b) To evaluate infrastructure requirements in the EU, such as port facilities for nuclear vessels; (c) Mapping full costs for a nuclear propelled ship on a life cycle basis.

3. Safety and Security: (a) To develop safety protocols for nuclear-powered ships, including emergency response and accident mitigation; (b) To address cybersecurity risks, external threats and proliferation concerns and safety in ports; (c) Assessing long-term crew training requirements for nuclear operations, safety and security and their implementation in international training and certification regulations.

4. Environmental Impact: (a) To analyze the potential reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, air and water pollutants caused by mining, refining, use and disposal of spent nuclear fuel; (b) To assess the impact of nuclear waste management and disposal as part of implementation of a circular economy approach; (c) To assess the impact of nuclear-powered ships on marine ecosystems; (d) To analyze possible damage scenarios with a view to liability issues and mitigation of damages.

5. Regulatory and Legal Framework: (a) To identify gaps in international maritime law and IAEA nuclear regulations; (b) To propose recommendations related to the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) and other relevant treaties.

6. The implications for National Energy and Climate Plans and National Air Pollution Control Programmes required by EU legislative framework.

7. Additionally, a strategy for skills development should be presented, associating social partners and civil society where relevant.

This topic implements the co-programmed European Partnership on Zero Emission Waterborne Transport (ZEWT). Projects will be expected to report on results to the ZEWT Partnership in support of the monitoring of its KPIs.

CONDITIONS:
1. Admissibility: Proposal page limits and layout described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes.
2. Eligible Countries: As described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.
3. Other Eligible Conditions: If projects use satellite-based earth observation, beneficiaries must use Copernicus and/or Galileo/EGNOS.
4. Financial and Operational Capacity and Exclusion: As described in Annex C.
5a. Award Criteria, Scoring and Thresholds: As described in Annex D.
5b. Submission and Evaluation Processes: As described in Annex F and the Online Manual.
6. Legal and Financial Set-up: Eligible costs take the form of a lump sum as defined in the Decision of 7 July 2021 authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme.
