Title: European Partnership on Innovative SMEs
Call Identifier: HORIZON-EIE-2021-INNOVSMES-01
Status: 
Deadline: 
Budget: 
Keywords: Business model innovation, Demand driven innovation, Design innovation, Disruptive innovation, Entrepreneurship, Forms of internationalisation, Incremental innovation, Internationalisation - Market access, Market-creating innovation, Marketing innovation, Marketing management, New business opportunities, Open innovation, Process innovation, Product innovation, Related to SME and start-up support, Service innovation, Services in support of internationalisation, Social innovation, Spin-off companies, Start-up companies, Sustainable innovation, Technological innovation, Technology management

Description:
Expected Outcome: Projects results are expected to contribute to all of the following expected outcomes: Improved knowledge transfer in the innovative SMEs ecosystem, through increased and sustained collaboration between SMEs, public research partners and academia; Mitigation of difficulties in access to finance for innovative SMEs and thus contribute to enhanced growth and expansion of innovative SMEs; Improved innovative SME access to new international markets or value chains thus leading to improved market share and sales for innovative SMEs increasing their employment capacity; Increase public research and innovation funding to innovative SMEs, to spur more high quality collaborations and more innovative solutions; Pull together national efforts to spur internationalisation and collaboration in innovative SMEs, avoiding unnecessary duplication leading to a simplified offer to beneficiaries, achieving a more balanced geographic participation, ensuring complementarity and improved innovation ecosystems across Europe. Scope: The proposal should provide mainly two types of activities. Firstly, regular calls for proposals resulting in collaborative research and innovation activities. These activities should result in a faster time to market, de-risking investment, supporting business growth, contributing to EU and global priorities and supporting access to markets and knowledge. Secondly, through coordination and support activities, the creation of synergies between and synchronisation of national programmes, and a better cooperation and knowledge exchange between national intermediaries. While collaborative research and innovation activities for internationalisation of innovative SMEs exist to some extent at Member State and EU level the alignment of national programmes and more effective and efficient processes of intermediaries and funding bodies are not addressed in instruments and programmes other than the Eurostars 1 and 2 programmes, supported under previous framework programmes. The initiative should draw on the experiences, and build on the successes, of those predecessor programmes. There is a clear added value and ‘selling point’ for the initiative to further address gaps towards a better alignment and increased focus on internationalisation. This reflects the definition of European Partnerships in the Horizon Europe regulation [1] as initiatives where the union and its partners ‘commit to jointly support the development and implementation of a programme of research and innovation activities, including those related to market, regulatory or policy uptake.’ The below list of specific activities, going beyond research and innovation activities, can therefore be implemented under the partnership and are anticipated as expected outputs: Support transnational near-market collaborative research and innovation addressing technological and societal challenges; Enhance SME readiness (absorptive capacities in all participating countries), Attract wide range of beneficiaries by country and SME type and age; Create synergies among national programmes by streamlining their execution; Enhance cooperation and knowledge exchange at level of national intermediaries. The proposed initiative will help innovative SMEs to increase their research and innovation capacities and productivity and to become embedded in global value chains and new markets. It will achieve this by supporting innovative SMEs in developing products, processes and services through funding market-led, cross-border, research and innovation collaborative projects and providing accompanying measures. The initiative addresses collaboration in Europe and beyond, and the commercialisation of new knowledge. Thereby it will strengthen the overall resilience of the European innovation ecosystem. The overall objective of the initiative is to implement a Co-funded European Partnership for Innovative SMEs to stimulate economic growth and job creation by enhancing the competitiveness of innovative SMEs while contributing to deliver a positive economic, societal and environmental impact in Europe and beyond. In order to address that objective, the initiative should: Enable innovative SMEs to develop all forms of innovation, including breakthrough innovation, and strengthen market deployment of innovative solutions; Foster the internationalisation of innovative SMEs; Connect national programmes to unlock the potential of all partners. Type and range of activities A main activity would be to run calls for proposals, organise the evaluation process and enable collaborative cross-border research and innovation projects. Beyond providing funding to innovative SMEs for cross-border R&I collaboration, they should include further promotion of the programme in underrepresented Member States, including but not limited to, through dissemination events, mutual learning seminars or roadshows. The initiative should exploit synergies with cohesion policy funds and significan

Conditions:
"> General conditions General conditions 1. Admissibility conditions: described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System 2. Eligible countries: described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide . 3. Other eligibility conditions: described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes 4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion: described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes The granting authority can fund a maximum of one project. Award criteria, scoring and thresholds are described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes Submission and evaluation processes are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement: described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes The starting date of grants awarded under this topic may be as of the submission date of the application. Applicants must justify the need for a retroactive starting date in their application. Costs incurred from the starting date of the action may be considered eligible. The funding rate is 30 % of the eligible costs. Beneficiaries may provide financial support to third parties. The support to third parties can only be provided in the form of grants. Financial support provided by the participants to third parties is one of the primary activities of this action in order to be able to achieve its objectives. The EUR 60 000 threshold provided for in Article 204(a) of the Financial Regulation No 2018/1046 does not apply. 6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants: described in An
