HORIZON EUROPA - WIDERA 2026
Topic: HORIZON-WIDERA-2026-04-WIDENING-01

7 Widening participation and strengthening the European Research Area
is reserved for the coordinator, the proposal should justify the amounts in terms of integration efforts for the new participant.
HORIZON-WIDERA-2026-04-WIDENING-01: Research Management Facility

Call: Research Management Facility

Specific conditions

Expected EU contribution per project

The Commission estimates that an EU contribution of around EUR 7.00 million would allow these outcomes to be addressed appropriately. Nonetheless, this does not preclude submission and selection of a proposal requesting different amounts.

Indicative budget The total indicative budget for the topic is EUR 7.00 million.

Type of Action

Coordination and Support Actions

Eligibility conditions

The conditions are described in General Annex B. The following exceptions apply:
To achieve the expected outcomes, participation as coordinators is limited to legal entities established in Widening countries, as defined in the Horizon Europe regulation.
Applications must be submitted by a consortium including participation, as beneficiaries, of at least three independent legal entities: Each established in a different Member State or Associated Country; and two of which are established in a Member State.
Due to the specific nature of the call, organisations hosting WIDERA NCPs in Widening countries are exceptionally eligible to participate.

Expected Outcome: Excellent capacities in research management are essential for institutions and national R&I systems to enhance their research excellence and capitalize on their R&I activities in a knowledge-based economy and society. The Research Management Facility aims at providing institutions in Widening countries that want to establish or upgrade their research management capacities with tailored support. The Research Management Facility also advises on an implementation strategy to introduce changes in the institutional set-up, in line with the ERA priorities. However, the action does not provide support for the implementation of the strategy.
Strong research management ensures effective grant acquisition, resource allocation, compliance with funding regulations, and strategic planning. It supports high-quality research by streamlining administrative processes, facilitating interdisciplinary collaborations, attracting and retaining international high-profile researchers, and optimizing the use of research infrastructures.

Proposals are expected to contribute to the following outcomes:

Part 11 - Page 32 of 132

Horizon Europe - Work Programme 2026-2027 Widening participation and strengthening the European Research Area

• Encourage the establishment of stronger research management capacities in Widening countries to enhance their participation in the European Research Area;
• Support institutional reforms in research institutions and national R&I systems to strengthen governance, efficiency, and alignment with European research and innovation priorities;
• Strengthen human capital with entrepreneurial and well-trained research managers;
• Promote and support multidisciplinary and transnational cooperation in the field of research management to foster knowledge exchange, capacity building, and alignment of best practices across institutions and countries;
• Promote of ERA priorities such as research integrity and responsible research and innovation (ethics, public engagement, gender equality, science education, open access) and knowledge valorisation, thereby strengthening the institution’s overall research ecosystem.
Scope: This action aims at creating a research management facility to provide support services including trainings to research institutions and their staff in Widening countries that want to establish or upgrade existing capacities and competencies in research management. The project should establish a facility inviting research performing organisations from Widening countries to support them in assessing their needs for excellent research management capacities, and develop implementation plans to improve their institutional and human capacities. The facility may also support successful applicants of ERA Research Manager actions in identifying leading research manager internationally.
Proposals are expected to cover at least the following activities:
• Support the assessment of institutional needs in research management, administration and training in close collaboration with the research performing institutions that express interest in their expertise;
• Support the development of a tailor-made implementation plans to establish or upgrade research management capacities at institutional level;
• Facilitate peer exchange and best practice sharing between Widening countries and more experienced institutions to support sustainable capacity building;
• Deliver training modules for research managers in Widening countries to strengthen their skills and professional competences, in line with the European Competence Framework for Research Managers33;
• Facilitate networking opportunities for research managers from Widening countries at European and international levels, to strengthen peer exchange, promote be