TITLE: Key enabling technologies for fusion power plants (European Partnership on Fusion Energy)
TOPIC CODE: HORIZON-EURATOM-2027-02-01
CALL IDENTIFIER: HORIZON-EURATOM-2027-02
CALL TITLE: Innovation actions under the co-programmed European partnership on fusion energy (2nd call)

=== DESCRIPTION ===
Expected Outcome:

the action is expected to mature and demonstrate (TRL 6-8) innovative technologies in one of the technology areas set out within the scope of the topic:

- developing and advancing the technology readiness of innovative individual components and/or integrated systems that perform the key functions of fusion power plants (FPPs), in line with the technology area targeted;
- testing the innovative components and/or systems developed in close-to-real-life conditions, demonstrating the ability to deliver fusion-grade components and/or systems;
- providing a credible business case, clarifying the potential and perspectives for the commercialisation of the components and/or systems developed, and showing the benefits for the competitiveness and growth of EU companies from the fusion field.
 Scope:

actions funded under this topic are expected to address one of the following technology areas of relevance that are key to the development of future fusion power plants:

- tritium breeding;
- fuel cycle;
- high-power lasers and optical technologies for inertial confinement fusion;
- targets for inertial confinement fusion;
- fusion-grade materials;
- qualification of reactor components in a relevant operational plasma scenario (including high neutron load);
- digital technologies (including modelling and simulation);
- the engineering design of future key enabling fusion facilities;
- any other technology relevant to FPPs. 
 Proposals should clearly indicate which one of these key areas they address and should, for this purpose and for the technology area(s) targeted:

- clarify the technology gaps / bottlenecks addressed by the proposed projects, demonstrating a thorough understanding of the needs and drivers towards viable FPPs, and of the state of the art for the technology area under consideration;
- set out the envisioned technology advances, making clear how the proposed innovation would make it possible to improve the performance of the components and/or systems developed, relying as much as possible on quantitative targets and / or key performance indicators;
- describe in detail the approaches to testing and demonstrating the components and/or systems developed, clearly indicating the technology readiness level targeted and the process by which technology maturation will be monitored;
- enable close cooperation between public research and private companies (start-ups, SMEs and industry). This should be reflected in the composition of the consortium and in the proposed project’s activities;
- demonstrate the business potential of the proposed innovation within and also (where relevant) beyond the fusion field, including its potential to support EU’s energy security independence and competitiveness, by contributing to the achievement of the commercialisation of fusion energy;
- where relevant, demonstrate a thorough understanding of the safety constraints on the deployment in FPPs of the components and/or systems developed;
- where relevant, outline how the proposed work would build on and articulate with the results and activities from other relevant EU initiatives (e.g. the EUROfusion partnership and the Fusion for Energy joint undertaking [1]). 
 This topic implements the co-programmed European Partnership on Fusion Energy [2] and will probably be amended in order to align its scope with the Partnership’s SRIA, once this has been published.

[1] https://fusionforenergy.europa.eu/

[2] It is expected that the European Partnership on Fusion Energy will be established and its strategic research and innovation agenda (SRIA) will be available when the call opens. Proposals should therefore explain how the proposed action aligns with the SRIA’s technology priorities and proposed projects should include activities designed to contributing to the European Partnership on Fusion Energy (e.g. contributing to the monitoring of the Partnership, supporting the Partnership’s communication and dissemination activities, and ensuring an effective liaison with the Partnership’s Board and the European Commission).

=== CONDITIONS ===
">Conditions

1. Admissibility conditions: the conditions are described in General Annex A (Admissibility) of Euratom WP 2026-2027.

Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System. For topics using lump sum funding, the limit for ‘Innovation’ actions is 45 pages.

2. Eligible countries: Elibility conditions are described in General Annex B (Eligibility) of Euratom WP 2026-2027.

See the List of Participating Countries in Horizon Europe (including Euratom) for up-to-date information on the current list of and the position for Associated Countries.

Please note that as of the date of the publication of this call, Ukraine and Switzerland are the only countries associated to the Euratom Programme, therefore eligible for funding.

3. Other eligibility conditions

In order to achieve the expected outcomes and safeguard the Union’s strategic assets, interests, autonomy and security[[ Namely, to support EU competitiveness in achieving commercialisation of fusion energy, to contribute to the achievement of the EU’s energy security and independence and to ensure effective safeguards of dual-use materials, technologies and knowledge used or developed under the Fusion PPP.]], participation is limited to legal entities established in Member States and in countries associated to the Euratom Research and Training Programme (Ukraine and Switzerland). Proposals including entities established in countries outside the scope specified in the call/topic/action will be ineligible.

General information about eligibility conditions can be found in General Annex B (Eligibility) of Euratom WP 2026-2027.

4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion: the criteria are described in General Annex C (Financial and operational capacity and exclusion) of Euratom WP 2026-2027.

5a. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes

To ensure a balanced portfolio covering as many as possible of the key technology areas set out in the scope, grants will be awarded within available budget to applications not only in order of ranking but at least also to one proposal that is the highest ranked within the different technology areas , provided that the proposals attain all thresholds.

The evaluation committee will be composed partially by representatives of EU institutions.

General information about submission and evaluation processes can be found in General Annexes E (Documents) and F (Procedure) of the Euratom Work Programme 2026-2027 and the Online Manual.

5b. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds

Described in General Annex D (Award criteria) of the Euratom Work Programme 2026-2027.

5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement

Described in General Annex F (Procedure) of the Euratom Work Programme 2026-2027.

6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants

Eligible costs will take the form of a lump sum as defined in the Decision of 7 July 2021 authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (2021-2027) – and in actions under the Research and Training Programme of the European Atomic Energy Community (2021-2025) [[This decision is available on the Funding and Tenders Portal, in the reference documents section for Horizon Europe, under ‘Simplified costs decisions’ or through this link: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/docs/2021-2027/horizon/guidance/ls-decision_he_en.pdf]].

The funding rate is 60% of the eligible costs, except for non-profit legal entities where the funding rate is up to 100% of the total eligible costs.

General legal and financial set-up is described in General Annex G (Legal and financial set-up of the grant agreements) of the Euratom Work Programme 2026-2027.

Euratom WP 2026-2027

 Euratom Work Programme 2026-2027 for nuclear research and training

Call document and annexes:

 Application form templates

Standard application form (HE RIA IA) — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System 

Detailed budget table (HE LS)&#xa0;

Information on financial support to third parties (HE)

Evaluation forms

Standard evaluation form (HE RIA IA) — will be used with the necessary adaptations&#xa0;

Model Grant Agreements (MGA)

Horizon Europe MGA&#xa0;

Lump Sum MGA

Additional documents:

 Euratom Research & Training Programme 2026-2027 (Council Regulation 2025/1304)

EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509

Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment

EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement

Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual 

Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions&#xa0;

Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement

=== SUPPORT INFO ===
For help related to this call, please contact please add a contact e-mail or url

Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – Submission of proposals.

IT Helpdesk – Contact the IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc.

Online Manual – Step-by-step online guide through the Portal processes from proposal preparation and evaluation to reporting on your ongoing project. Valid for all 2021-2027 programmes.