INSTRUMENTO: Soutenir la mise en œuvre de la mission Restaurer nos océans et nos eaux
CODIGO: HORIZON-MISS-2026-03-OCEAN-03
FONTE: EU Funding & Tenders Portal / Horizon Europe (HORIZON)
DATA_DOWNLOAD: 2026-05-05

NOME OFICIAL: By fishers, for fishers: co-management of marine and freshwaters ecosystems and resources
CALL: HORIZON-MISS-2026-03
CALL TITLE: Supporting the implementation of the Restore our Ocean and Waters Mission
PROGRAMA: HORIZON - Horizon Europe (HORIZON)
TIPO ACAO: 

DOTACAO:
  2026: EUR 31.000.000

PRAZOS:
ABERTURA: 2026-02-04
DEADLINE: 2026-09-23
MODELO_PRAZO: single-stage

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: Earth and related environmental sciences, End-users, Innovation management, Ocean

DESCRICAO E IMPACTO ESPERADO:
Expected Outcome:

Project results are expected to contribute to all of the following outcomes:

- Measurable improvements in the status of critical marine and/or freshwaters habitats (including blue carbon sequestration capacities) and of species through active and passive conservation and restoration measures;
- Increased sustainability of fishing practices and tools and enhanced implementation of eco-system-based approaches as outlined in the Common Fisheries Policy (CFP);
- Measurable socio-economic benefits for local communities, skill development and job creation;
- Enhanced governance in the co-management of ecosystems and resources at local and basin level and overall strengthened Mission governance framework;
- Improved cross-border coordination in fish movement data collection and exchange.

Scope:

The Communication of the Commission on “A vision for agriculture and food sectors - Shaping together an attractive EU farming and food sector for future generations”[1] highlights the strategic importance of fisheries for the Union and the role fishers play, as custodians of nature, for the protection and resilience of our ocean, waters, and biodiversity. Equally important are the objectives and actions set out in the European Ocean Pact[2] and the EU Action Plan: Protecting and restoring marine ecosystems for sustainable and resilient fisheries[3].

Proposals under this topic are expected to show how activities and results will contribute to achieve both Mission objective 1 – Protect and restore marine and freshwater ecosystems and biodiversity, and Mission objective 3 – Sustainable, carbon-neutral and circular blue economy.

The goal is to further develop adaptive co-management approaches to reconcile fisheries with the environmental sustainability, ensuring the long-term viability of both marine and/or freshwater ecosystems and local livelihoods. This approach promotes a harmonious relationship between fishers and coastal communities, fostering a more sustainable and inclusive management of marine resources. Co-management approaches should incorporate long-term participatory ecological monitoring, engaging fishers directly in data collection and contributing to a continuous assessment of ecosystem health and fisheries sustainability.

Proposals should address all following issues:

- focus on empowering fishers, including small-scale and recreational fishers, towards a transition to sustainable fisheries by engaging and involving them in co-management of the marine and freshwaters ecosystems and resources, in particular in protected areas and reserves where fishing is allowed;
- show active involvement of fishers since the start of the project;
- test and demonstrate on the ground sustainable and inclusive science-based approaches and solutions for the co-management of marine and freshwaters resources.

Active engagement of fishers in habitat protection and restoration could include e.g.: regenerative practices; ecosystem management approaches; measures for prevention and control of invasive species; fish stock recovery plans; sustainable low-impact fishing operations, technologies and tools; multipurpose use of marine space as well as citizen science actions to raise fishers’ awareness and involve them in all steps from data collection to their assessment and use. Projects are encouraged to undertake actions to enhance carbon sequestration capacities of marine and coastal ecosystems, including mangroves, saltmarshes and seagrass habitats. These actions should align with the QU.A.L.ITY criteria (Quantification, Additionality, Long-term storage, and Sustainability) set out in the Regulation (EU) 2024/3012, which establishes a voluntary Union certification framework for permanent carbon removals, carbon farming, and carbon storage in products and engage with recognised certification bodies/schemes to provide evidence of carbon sequestration capacities.

Each proposal should identify explicitly the basin being addressed, i.e.: 1. Atlantic and Arctic sea basin or 2. Mediterranean Sea basin or 3. Baltic and North Sea basin or 4. Danube River basin, including Black Sea. Only one basin per proposal should be addressed.

The effectiveness and efficiency of the measures proposed must be demonstrated in at least 5 demonstration sites in three different Member States or Associated Countries per basin.

The active involvement of fishers in the testing/demonstration activities is crucial to tailor the solutions to specific conditions and to ensure that their knowledge, needs and expectations are taken in due account.

Training and communication activities addressing fishers and relevant stakeholders, including local/regional authorities, should be also included to build capacity and promote sustainable developments and business opportunities at local level, including in relation to impact of climate change on resource availability. The involvement of Social Science and Humanities (SSH) experts might be useful for these activities. Proposals should also consider the gender and intersectional dimension in the implementation of the activities.

In addition, projects should ensure that fishers adopt ethical and sustainable practices and methods that prioritise animal welfare and prevent unnecessary harm to marine and freshwater species.

Activities are expected to contribute to data collection and data sharing through the European Marine Observation and Data Network (EMODnet) and to support the Digital Twin Ocean.

Continuous monitoring and assessment of the activities implemented by the projects should be ensured to measure ecological and socio-economic impacts (e.g.: on employment, working conditions, income, well-being) and the contribution of the activities to achieve the Mission objectives and targets.

Projects are expected to show a significant replication potential by identifying a range of relevant stakeholders that could replicate the proposed solutions and approaches. Actions plans and roadmaps needed for the replication and up-scale of the solutions should be drawn up by the end of the projects.

Governance issues should be addressed in order to ensure effective implementation of the activities and foster multi-level governance across national, regional and local level and to facilitate exchanges and replication between different actors.

Proposals should establish operational links and cooperate with the relevant Lighthouse CSAs and the Mission Implementation Platform, notably to contribute to tracking progress towards the objectives of the Mission and coordination of all relevant implementation activities in the lighthouse basin.

null

Activities are expected to achieve TRL 6-8 by the end of the project – see General Annex B.

[1] COM(2025) 75 final

[2] COM(2025)281

[3] COM(2023) 102 final

CONDICOES / ELEGIBILIDADE / CRITERIOS:
">General conditions1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout

﻿described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes.

Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System.

2. Eligible Countries

described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide.

3. Other Eligible Conditions

If projects use satellite-based earth observation, positioning, navigation and/or related timing data and services, beneficiaries must make use of Copernicus and/or Galileo/EGNOS (other data and services may additionally be used).

The following additional eligibility criteria apply: in addition to the standard eligibility conditions, the consortium must carry out demonstration activities in at least 5 sites in 3 different Member States or Associated Countries of the basin addressed by the proposal (i.e.: 1. Atlantic and Arctic basin or 2. Mediterranean Sea basin or 3. Baltic and North Sea basin or 4. Danube River basin, including Black Sea), and include, as beneficiaries, legal entities established in these respective countries.

described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion

described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds

To ensure a balanced portfolio covering the 4 different Mission basins[[For the purposes of Mission Ocean and waters, Member States/Associated Countries, are considered to be part of a given sea/river basin if they have a coast/riverbank on the relevant sea/river or contain river basins flowing into the relevant sea]] (1. Atlantic and Arctic sea basin, 2. Mediterranean Sea basin, 3. Baltic and North Sea basin, 4. Danube River basin, including Black Sea), grants will be awarded to applications not only in order of ranking but at least also to one proposal that is the highest ranked within each sea basin, provided that the applications attain all thresholds.

are described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes

are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual.

5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement

described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes.

6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants

Beneficiaries will be subject to the following additional obligations regarding open science practices: if projects collect in-situ data and marine observation, beneficiaries must make them openly available through the European Marine Observation and Data network (EMODnet), based on the FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, Reusable) principles.

described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes.

Specific conditions 

described in the [specific topic of the Work Programme]

Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA): 

Application form templates — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System

Standard application form (HE RIA, IA)

Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations 

Standard evaluation form (HE RIA, IA)&#xa0;

Guidance

HE Programme Guide&#xa0;

Model Grant Agreements (MGA)

HE MGA&#xa0;

Call-specific instructions&#xa0;

Additional documents: 

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 1. General Introduction

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 12. Missions

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 15. General Annexes

HE Programme Guide

HE Framework Programme 2021/695

HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764

EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509

Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment

EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement

Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual 

Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions&#xa0;

Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement

INFORMACAO DE SUPORTE:
Online Manual is your guide on the procedures from proposal submission to managing your grant.

Horizon Europe Programme Guide contains the detailed guidance to the structure, budget and political priorities of Horizon Europe.

Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – find the answers to most frequently asked questions on submission of proposals, evaluation and grant management.

Research Enquiry Service – ask questions about any aspect of European research in general and the EU Research Framework Programmes in particular.

National Contact Points (NCPs) – get guidance, practical information and assistance on participation in Horizon Europe. There are also NCPs in many non-EU and non-associated countries (‘third-countries’).

Enterprise Europe Network – contact your EEN national contact for advice to businesses with special focus on SMEs. The support includes guidance on the EU research funding.

IT Helpdesk – contact the Funding & Tenders Portal IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc.

European IPR Helpdesk assists you on intellectual property issues.

CEN-CENELEC Research Helpdesk and ETSI Research Helpdesk – the European Standards Organisations advise you how to tackle standardisation in your project proposal.

The European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for their recruitment – consult the general principles and requirements specifying the roles, responsibilities and entitlements of researchers, employers and funders of researchers.

Partner Search help you find a partner organisation for your proposal.

FONTE OFICIAL: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/opportunities/topic-details/HORIZON-MISS-2026-03-OCEAN-03