TITLE: Enhancing Resilience and Accuracy in Positioning, Navigation, and Timing (PNT) Systems and e-conspicuity solutions
TOPIC CODE: HORIZON-CL5-2027-06-D6-11
CALL IDENTIFIER: HORIZON-CL5-2027-06
CALL TITLE: MOBILITY

=== DESCRIPTION ===
Expected Outcome:

Project results are expected to contribute to all of the following expected outcomes:

- Development of solutions integrating 5G networks, supported by advanced signal processing techniques (e.g. AI-Enhanced Signal Processing) to improve the accuracy of PNT systems, as GNSS backup solutions to enhance resilience in contested environments, including filtering noise and interference from signals to enhance the precision of location data, and appropriate post-quantum cryptographic measures to enhance resilience against emerging threats.
- Integration with Other Technologies: Development of solutions leveraging Internet of Things (sensors, communication signals, AI-enhanced processing), and other sensing techniques to provide redundant and resilient navigation solutions and to enhance capabilities and applications, especially at low altitude airspace.
- E-conspicuity: Definition of mobile communication performance requirements for e-conspicuity, assessment of network performance and determination of minimum availability requirements for mobile telephony for collision to support collision avoidance for a drone and manned aircraft.
- Analysis of policy and regulatory aspects to better understand the legal and regulatory issues surrounding the deployment and use of PNT systems, including concerns related to privacy, spectrum management, international cooperation, and harmonisation of regulatory frameworks and shared technologies.
 Scope:

Today’s Position, Navigation and Timing (PNT) services are primarily provided through Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) that tend to have weak signals and are vulnerable to jamming and spoofing.

This topic addresses alternative PNT methods that are essential to provide fallback options in case of GNSS signal loss or degradation. Great benefit is expected through integration of PNT technology with rapidly emerging technologies, such as 5G/6G and Internet of Things (IoT). The aim is to investigate innovative solutions for PNT – including the impact on the regulatory framework, integrating advanced 5G technologies and IoT to act as complementary, redundant, secure and resilient navigation solutions for aviation, including UAS, in challenging environments.

The topic also addresses e-conspicuity, aiming to enhance pilot awareness notably at lower altitudes in U-space airspace in order to reduces collision risk in general aviation, where most small aircraft rely on see-and-avoid. Mobile telephony, with minimum network performance requirements, can provide a safe, affordable communication solution for U-space entry and flight safety.

null

Activities are expected to achieve TRL 6-7 by the end of the project – see General Annex B. Activities may start at any TRL.

=== CONDITIONS ===
">General conditions

1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout

﻿described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes.

Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System.

2. Eligible Countries

described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide.

3. Other Eligible Conditions

If projects use satellite-based earth observation, positioning, navigation and/or related timing data and services, beneficiaries must make use of Copernicus and/or Galileo/EGNOS (other data and services may additionally be used).

In line with the “restriction on control in innovation actions in critical technology areas” delineated in General Annex B of the General Annexes, entities established in an eligible country but which are directly or indirectly controlled by China or by a legal entity established in China are not eligible to participate in the action.

described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion

described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds

are described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes

are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual.

5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement

described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes.

6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants

The granting authority may, up to 4 years after the end of the action, object to a transfer of ownership or to the exclusive licensing of results, as set out in the specific provision of Annex 5.

Eligible costs will take the form of a lump sum as defined in the Decision of 7 July 2021 authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (2021-2027) – and in actions under the Research and Training Programme of the European Atomic Energy Community (2021-2025) [[This decision is available on the Funding and Tenders Portal, in the reference documents section for Horizon Europe, under ‘Simplified costs decisions’ or through this link: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/docs/2021-2027/horizon/guidance/ls-decision_he_en.pdf]].

described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes.

Specific conditions

 Not applicable.

Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA):

 Application form templates — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System

Standard application form (HE RIA, IA)

Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations 

Standard evaluation form (HE RIA, IA)&#xa0;

Guidance

HE Programme Guide&#xa0;

Model Grant Agreements (MGA)

Lump Sum MGA&#xa0;

Call-specific instructions&#xa0;

Detailed budget table (HE LS)&#xa0;

Guidance: "Lump sums - what do I need to know?"

Additional documents:

 HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 1. General Introduction

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 8. Climate, Energy and Mobility

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 15. General Annexes

HE Programme Guide

HE Framework Programme 2021/695

HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764

EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509

Decision authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme

Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment

EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement 

Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual&#xa0;

Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions&#xa0;

Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement

=== SUPPORT INFO ===
Online Manual is your guide on the procedures from proposal submission to managing your grant.

Horizon Europe Programme Guide contains the detailed guidance to the structure, budget and political priorities of Horizon Europe.

Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – find the answers to most frequently asked questions on submission of proposals, evaluation and grant management.

Research Enquiry Service – ask questions about any aspect of European research in general and the EU Research Framework Programmes in particular.

National Contact Points (NCPs) – get guidance, practical information and assistance on participation in Horizon Europe. There are also NCPs in many non-EU and non-associated countries (‘third-countries’).

Enterprise Europe Network – contact your EEN national contact for advice to businesses with special focus on SMEs. The support includes guidance on the EU research funding.

IT Helpdesk – contact the Funding & Tenders Portal IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc.

European IPR Helpdesk assists you on intellectual property issues.

CEN-CENELEC Research Helpdesk and ETSI Research Helpdesk – the European Standards Organisations advise you how to tackle standardisation in your project proposal.

The European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for their recruitment – consult the general principles and requirements specifying the roles, responsibilities and entitlements of researchers, employers and funders of researchers.

Partner Search help you find a partner organisation for your proposal.