Title: Support for the Sustainable Nuclear Energy Technology Platform to address cross-sectoral challenges and non-power applications of ionising radiation
Identifier: HORIZON-EURATOM-2026-01-06
Call Identifier: HORIZON-EURATOM-2026-01
Call Title: Nuclear research and training
Framework Programme: Euratom Research and Training Programme (EURATOM)
Actions/Types: {"status": {"id": 31094502, "abbreviation": "Open", "description": "Open"}, "types": [{"typeOfAction": "EURATOM-CSA EURATOM Coordination and Support Actions", "typeOfMGA": [{"id": 43252184, "abbreviation": "EURATOM-AG", "description": "EURATOM Action Grant Budget-Based"}]}], "plannedOpeningDate": "1776902400000", "submissionProcedure": {}, "deadlineDates": ["1789430400000"]}

--- DESCRIPTION ---

Expected Outcome:
the project results are expected to contribute to all the following outcomes:
structuring of the Sustainable Nuclear Energy Technology Platform (SNETP) activities and consolidation of networks in the different technology areas covered by the Euratom programme, together with the Implementing Geological Disposal Technology Platform (IGDTP) and the consortium following the European Radiation Research Platforms (MEENAS). The focusing will be on cross-cutting nuclear energy applications (e.g. nuclear for heat or/and electricity production, energy supply in space and maritime propulsion) and on non-energy applications (including cross-cutting or medical applications of ionising radiation and improved optimisation of protection in this area);
integrating the different energy roadmaps (nuclear and non-nuclear) by fostering collaboration between European Technology and Innovation Platforms in order to address cross-sectorial challenges. This will include (a) integration of NPPs into sustainable low-carbon and smart energy systems to complement the achievement of Horizon Europe’s objectives (including in the context of the energy transition); and (b) development of power systems for space applications;
supporting the integration of SNETP in Horizon Europe’s cross-sectorial activities, with particular emphasis on non-power applications and associated radiation protection, education and training. Cross-cutting actions to maximise the societal benefits of nuclear and radiation technologies should be identified;
supporting the identification of research priorities and key actions for the nuclear R&I community within various EU policy instruments (e.g. SET Plan updates and annual reports);
communicating the platform's activities to policymakers and stakeholders (including stakeholders outside the power generation sector);
facilitating cooperation between projects throughout the EU in order to ensure the accessibility and reusability of produced data.
 Scope:
SNETP is a European technology and innovation platform (ETIP) that supports and promotes the safe, secure, reliable and efficient operation of nuclear systems. Rapidly developing non-power applications of ionising radiation (e.g. in the health, industrial and space sectors) will require long-term effort to reduce safety risks and support the development of safe nuclear technologies and optimal radiation protection.
In this context, SNETP should, in 2026-2027, continue to integrate research and innovation in nuclear safety at the EU level. It should also stimulate innovation in nuclear technologies beyond their more traditional areas of implementation because they can play a vital role in improving standards of living and health in the EU.
Euratom funding will be devoted to specific studies, data collection, analysis and workshops for the further development of technology roadmaps, implementation plans and deployment strategies, as well as to the dissemination of the platform activities to the various stakeholders. Due attention should be given to integrating the different energy roadmaps (nuclear and non-nuclear). Activities should aim to foster collaboration between ETIPs in order to address cross-sectoral challenges (i.e. involving both nuclear and non-nuclear energy sources), with a particular emphasis on materials, digital and AI, and the medical and other non-power applications of ionising radiation.
This action should support SNETP in structuring its activities and orienting them towards cross-sectoral and non-power applications. It should enable the consolidation of sustainable networks across the different technology areas covered by the Euratom Research and Training Programme and should facilitate cooperation with other ETIPs and similar stakeholder forums. It should support SNETP efforts to foster more interconnected activities with other industrial sectors (particularly the health sector), in terms of both content and implementation mechanisms. It should also help nuclear scientists to more closely integrate into relevant Horizon Europe actions (e.g. Europe’s Beating Cancer Action Plan and Cancer Mission) and thus help communicate the platform and Programme activities to policymakers and stakeholders outside the power generation sector.
The proposal should include actions to facilitate cooperation with other projects across the EU and to ensure the accessibility and reusability of data produced in the course of the projects. The proposal should also include a financial and sustainability plan for the continuation of activities beyond the duration of the funded action. SNETP’s secretariat and other running costs are not eligible for funding under this action.
The indicative project duration is three years.

--- CONDITIONS ---

">Conditions
1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout
Described in General Annexes to the Euratom Work Programme 2026-2027, General Conditions, A - Admissibility
Proposal page limits and layout: layout described in Part B of the Application Form. For CSA using lump sum the page limit of Part B is 28 pages. 

2. Eligible Countries
Described in General Annexes to the Euratom Work Programme 2026-2027, General Conditions, B - Eligibility.
See the List of Participating Countries in Horizon Europe (including Euratom) for up-to-date information on the current list of and the position for Associated Countries.
Please note that as of the date of the publication of this call, Ukraine and Switzerland are the only countries associated to the Euratom Programme, therefore eligible for funding.

3. Other Eligible Conditions
Other eligible conditions are described in General Annexes to the Euratom Work Programme 2026-2027, General Conditions, B - Eligibility.

4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion
Described in General Annexes to the Euratom Work Programme 2026-2027, General Conditions, C — Financial and operational capacity and exclusion.

5a. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes
Described in General Annexes to the Euratom Work Programme 2026-2027, General Conditions, E — Documents and F — Procedure; and the Online Manual.

5b. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds
Described in General Annexes to the Euratom Work Programme 2026-2027, General Conditions, D — Award criteria.

5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement
Described in General Annexes to the Euratom Work Programme 2026-2027, General Conditions, F — Procedure.

6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants
Eligible costs will take the form of a lump sum as defined in the Decision of 7 July 2021 authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (2021-2027) – and in actions under the Research and Training Programme of the European Atomic Energy Community (2021-2025) [[This decision is available on the Funding and Tenders Portal, in the reference documents section for Horizon Europe, under ‘Simplified costs decisions’ or through this link: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/docs/2021-2027/horizon/guidance/ls-decision_he_en.pdf]].

General legal and financial set-up described in General Annexes to the Euratom Work Programme 2026-2027, General Conditions, G — Legal and financial set-up of the grant agreements.

Euratom WP 2026-2027
 Euratom Work Programme 2026-2027 for nuclear research and training 

Call document and annexes:
 Application form templates
Standard application form (HE CSA) — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System
Detailed budget table (HE LS)
Evaluation forms
Standard evaluation form (HE CSA) — will be used with the necessary adaptations
Model Grant Agreements (MGA)
Horizon Europe MGA 
Lump Sum MGA

Additional documents:
 Euratom Research & Training Programme 2026-2027 (Council Regulation 2025/1304)
EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509
Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment
EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement
Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual 
Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions 
Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement