INSTRUMENTO: Next generation of renewable energy technologies
IDENTIFICADOR: HORIZON-CL5-2026-04-Two-Stage-D3-02
AVISO: HORIZON-CL5-2026-04-Two-Stage
CALL TITLE: ENERGY
PROGRAMA: {'id': 43108390, 'abbreviation': 'HORIZON', 'description': 'Horizon Europe (HORIZON)'}
DIVISAO:  |  |  | 
TIPO DE ACAO: HORIZON Lump Sum Grant
DOTACAO: 2026: EUR 23,500,000
PRAZO: 2026-03-31 | 2026-10-20
PALAVRAS-CHAVE: 

DESCRICAO:
Expected Outcome: Projects are expected to contribute to all of the following expected outcomes: Breakthrough and game changing renewable energy technologies enabling a faster transition to a net-zero greenhouse gas emissions EU economy by 2050. Measures, knowledge and data have been demonstrating that the technology has a minimal environmental impact (notably on biodiversity and pollution), has gained citizens’ trust, is economically viable and benefits from a multi-level policy support. Establishing a solid long term dependable European innovation base. Scope: The proposal is expected to address high-risk and high return technology developments for game changing renewable energy technologies. It could cover, for example, catalyst development, renewable energy storage systems, integration of renewable energy technologies into a single energy generation system, hybrid renewable energy systems, heating & cooling systems, fuels production systems, (direct) solar fuels and solar driven chemical processes, hybrid electricity generation solutions between different renewable energy sources, direct utilization of renewable energy sources. The following areas are excluded from the scope of the topic as they fall within the scope of partnerships or other calls: Hydrogen production through electrolysers. Fuel cells. Basic material research. Batteries. The proposal is expected to establish technological feasibility of its concept through a robust research methodology, at least TRL 4 or at most TRL 5. The concept could be based on a new solution or on the improvement of an existing high-risk and high return solution. Technology transfer from sectors other than energy should be considered whenever relevant, as it may provide ideas, experiences, technology contributions, knowledge, skills, and new approaches. For bioenergy or biofuel concepts, whenever the direct use of biogenic waste is considered, resource availability and treatment will be taken into account from the design stage. In developing its concept, the proposal is expected to address the following related aspects: lower environmental impact, minimise impacts on biodiversity and protected species and habitats, reduced pollution, better resource efficiency (materials, geographical footprints, water, etc…). Whenever risks have been identified, mitigation measures need to be presented. The proposal is expected also to present a comparison with current commercial renewable energy technologies and/or solutions to show its advantages in terms of expected economic performance, environmental impact (notably on biodiversity and pollution), energy security, competitivity and industrial independence [1] . Selected projects are expected to consider the drivers behind social acceptance and trust-building of the technological solution and assess the best way to promote local involvement as part of ensuring a just transition (gender, cultural and socio-economic factors should be accounted for). An analysis of policy approaches that are encompassing (policy mixes), adaptive (policy learning) and context sensitive (working for different places, levels and/or sectors) should also be performed in order to support the deployment of the future new technology. This topic requires the effective contribution of SSH disciplines and the involvement of SSH experts, institutions as well as the inclusion of relevant SSH expertise, in order to produce meaningful and significant effects enhancing the societal impact of the related research activities. Proposals are encouraged to consider, where relevant, services offered by European research infrastructures [2] , as well as related projects offering access to research infrastructures in the clean energy domain- particularly RISEnergy [3] . null Activities are expected to achieve TRL 4-5 by the end of the project – see General Annex B. Activities may start at any TRL. [1] For an example of methodology for the assessment of sustainability, circularity and contribution to EU resilience and technological autonomy of clean energy technology in the R&I pipeline, please see Study on circular approaches for a sustainable and affordable clean energy transition [2] The catalogue of European Strategy Forum on Research Infrastructures (ESFRI) research infrastructures portfolio can be browsed from ESFRI website https://ri-portfolio.esfri.eu/ [3] RISE Energy- Homepage -

CONDICOES DE ELEGIBILIDADE:
"> General conditions 1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout ﻿ described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes. Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System. 2. Eligible Countries described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes. A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide . 3. Other Eligible Conditions If projects use satellite-based earth observation, positioning, navigation and/or related timing data and services, beneficiaries must make use of Copernicus and/or Galileo/EGNOS (other data and services may additionally be used). described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes. 4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes. 5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds are described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes. 5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual . 5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes. 6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants Eligible costs will take the form of a lump sum as defined in the Decision of 7 July 2021 authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (2021-2027) – and in actions under the Research and Training Programme of the European Atomic Energy Community (2021-2025) [[This decision is available on the Funding and Tenders Portal, in the reference documents section for Horizon Europe, under ‘Simplified costs decisions’ or through this link: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/docs/2021-2027/horizon/guidance/ls-decision_he_en.pdf ]]. described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes. Specific conditions described in the [specific topic of the Work Programme] Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA): Application form templates — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System Standard application form (HE RIA IA Stage 1) Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations Standard evaluation form (HE RIA, IA and CSA Stage 1) &#xa0; Guidance HE Programme Guide &#xa0; Model Grant Agreements (MGA) Lump Sum MGA &#xa0; Call-specific instructions &#xa0; Detailed budget table (HE LS) &#xa0; Guidance: "Lump sums - what do I need to know?" Additional documents: HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 1. General Introduction HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 8. Climate, Energy and Mobility HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 15. General Annexes HE Programme Guide HE Framework Programme 2021/695 HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764 EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509 Decision authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual &#xa0; Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions &#xa0; Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement

INFORMACAO DE SUPORTE:
Online Manual is your guide on the procedures from proposal submission to managing your grant. Horizon Europe Programme Guide contains the detailed guidance to the structure, budget and political priorities of Horizon Europe. Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – find the answers to most frequently asked questions on submission of proposals, evaluation and grant management. Research Enquiry Service – ask questions about any aspect of European research in general and the EU Research Framework Programmes in particular. National Contact Points (NCPs) – get guidance, practical information and assistance on participation in Horizon Europe. There are also NCPs in many non-EU and non-associated countries (‘third-countries’). Enterprise Europe Network – contact your EEN national contact for advice to businesses with special focus on SMEs. The support includes guidance on the EU research funding. IT Helpdesk – contact the Funding & Tenders Portal IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc. European IPR Helpdesk assists you on intellectual property issues. CEN-CENELEC Research Helpdesk and ETSI Research Helpdesk – the European Standards Organisations advise you how to tackle standardisation in your project proposal. The European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for their recruitment – consult the general principles and requirements specifying the roles, responsibilities and entitlements of researchers, employers and funders of researchers. Partner Search help you find a partner organisation for your proposal.
