TITLE: MSCA Staff Exchanges 2027
IDENTIFIER: HORIZON-MSCA-2027-SE-01-01
CALL: MSCA Staff Exchanges 2027 (HORIZON-MSCA-2027-SE-01)
PROGRAMME: Horizon Europe (HORIZON) [HORIZON]
PROGRAMME DIVISION: Strengthening Human Resources and Skills Development across the European Research Area / Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions (MSCA) / Excellent Science
PUBLICATION DATE: 2025-12-12
ACTION:  - DEADLINES: ["1807747200000"]
BUDGET: {"112995": [{"action": "HORIZON-MSCA-2027-SE-01-01 - HORIZON-TMA-MSCA-SE HORIZON TMA MSCA Staff Exchanges", "plannedOpeningDate": "1797292800000", "deadlineModel": "single-stage", "deadlineDates": ["1807747200000"], "budgetYearMap": {"2027": "95035106"}, "expectedGrants": 0, "minContribution": 0, "maxContribution": 0}]}
BUDGET YEARS: ["2027"]
MGA: HORIZON Unit Grant

--- DESCRIPTION ---
Expected Outcome:
Project results are expected to contribute to the following outcomes:
For staff members
- Increased set of research and transferable skills and competences, leading to improved employability and career prospects within and outside academia;
- More knowledge and innovative ideas converted into products, processes and services;
- More entrepreneurial mind-sets, testing new and innovative ideas;
- Increased international exposure leading to extended networks and opportunities;
- Enhanced networking and communication capacities with scientific peers, as well as with the general public that will increase and broaden the research and innovation impact.
 
For participating organisations
- Innovative ways of cooperation and transfer of knowledge between sectors and disciplines;
- Strengthened and broader international, inter-sectoral and interdisciplinary collaborative networks;
- Boosted R&I capacity.
 
Scope:
MSCA Staff Exchanges involve organisations from the academic and non-academic sectors (including SMEs) from across the globe. International cooperation through the participation of organisations from non-associated third countries is strongly encouraged.
Support is provided for international, inter-sectoral and interdisciplinary mobility of R&I staff leading to knowledge transfer between participating organisations.
Mobility through secondments
The organisations constituting the partnership contribute directly to the implementation of a joint R&I project by seconding and/or hosting eligible staff members. Such a project must explore activities that can be based on previous work but should go beyond and generate or strengthen long-term collaborations. Secondments must involve physical mobility[1] of the eligible staff members and must always take place between legal entities independent from each other.
MSCA Staff Exchanges can address different dimensions of mobility: international, inter-sectoral and interdisciplinary[2]. Exchanges between organisations within EU Member States and Horizon Europe Associated Countries should mainly be inter-sectoral, but same-sector exchanges are also possible. Interdisciplinarity is particularly encouraged for secondments between academic organisations.
The collaborative approach of MSCA Staff Exchanges should exploit complementary competences of the participating organisations and create synergies between them. The secondments should be essential to achieve the joint project’s R&I activities. The project should inter alia enable networking activities and the organisation of workshops and conferences, to facilitate sharing of knowledge and testing of innovative approaches for specific R&I topics.
Skills’ development
For participating staff members, the project should offer new skills acquisition and career development perspectives. Participating organisations must ensure that the seconded staff are adequately mentored. Proposals should clearly describe how planned international, intersectoral and interdisciplinary secondments will expose seconded staff to different skills, working cultures or career trajectories.
[1] Virtual mobility is not allowed for secondments.
[2] Interdisciplinarity means the integration of information, data, techniques, tools, perspectives, concepts or theories from two or more scientific disciplines (see definitions at the end of this Work Programme part).

--- CONDITIONS ---
">General conditions
1. Admissibility conditions: Proposal page limit and layout
﻿described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes.
Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System.

2. Eligible countries
described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.
A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide.

3. Other Eligibility Conditions
described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion
described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds
described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes
described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual.

5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement
described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes.

6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants
described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes.

Specific conditions
 described in the [specific topic of the Work Programme]

Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA):
 Application form templates
Please use the application form that you will find in the Submission System. You can find examples of standard application forms in the Reference Documents page.
Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations
Standard evaluation form (HE MSCA)
Guidance
HE Programme Guide 
Model Grant Agreements (MGA)
HE MGA 
HE Unit MGA 
Call-specific instructions 
HE MSCA SE Guide for Applicants

Additional documents:
 HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 1. General Introduction
HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 2. Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions (MSCA)
HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 15. General Annexes
HE Framework Programme and Rules for Participation Regulation 2021/695
HE Framework Programme 2021/695
HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764
EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509
Decision authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme
Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment
EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement
Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual
Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions 
Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement

--- SUPPORT INFO ---
Online Manual is your guide on the procedures from proposal submission to managing your grant.
Horizon Europe Programme Guide contains the detailed guidance to the structure, budget and political priorities of Horizon Europe.
Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – find the answers to most frequently asked questions on submission of proposals, evaluation and grant management.
Research Enquiry Service – ask questions about any aspect of European research in general and the EU Research Framework Programmes in particular.
National Contact Points (NCPs) – get guidance, practical information and assistance on participation in Horizon Europe. There are also NCPs in many non-EU and non-associated countries (‘third-countries’).
Enterprise Europe Network – contact your EEN national contact for advice to businesses with special focus on SMEs. The support includes guidance on the EU research funding.
IT Helpdesk – contact the Funding & Tenders Portal IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc.
European IPR Helpdesk assists you on intellectual property issues.
CEN-CENELEC Research Helpdesk and ETSI Research Helpdesk – the European Standards Organisations advise you how to tackle standardisation in your project proposal.
The European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for their recruitment – consult the general principles and requirements specifying the roles, responsibilities and entitlements of researchers, employers and funders of researchers.
Partner Search help you find a partner organisation for your proposal.