INSTRUMENTO: Historical and regional analyses of industrial transitions and their lessons for ensuring a fair green transition
CODIGO: HORIZON-CL2-2025-01-TRANSFO-02
FONTE: EU Funding & Tenders Portal / Horizon Europe (HORIZON)
DATA_DOWNLOAD: 2026-05-05

NOME OFICIAL: Historical and regional analyses of industrial transitions and their lessons for ensuring a fair green transition
CALL: HORIZON-CL2-2025-01
CALL TITLE: Culture, Creativity and Inclusive Society - 2025
PROGRAMA: HORIZON - Horizon Europe (HORIZON)
TIPO ACAO: 

DOTACAO:
  2025: EUR 10.200.000

PRAZOS:
ABERTURA: 2025-05-15
DEADLINE: 2025-09-16
MODELO_PRAZO: single-stage

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: Economic geography, Economic history, Gender in social sciences, Industrial economics

DESCRICAO E IMPACTO ESPERADO:
Expected Outcome:

Projects should contribute to all of the following expected outcomes:

- Provide policymakers with an analysis of past and present industrial transformations and what successful policies and measures were used to combat their negative externalities.
- Improve the understanding on the mechanisms of regional responses (e.g. geographic mobility of labour) and provide policymakers with a set of recommendations for seizing the opportunities and smoothing the risks of the developments. Analyse and evaluate forms of collaborative and participatory approaches to the management and governance of transition processes, including through social dialogue and collective bargaining. 

Scope:

The geographic variation in the impact of the European Green Deal is crucially important. Even though the green transition will have a positive impact and will improve our societies in many respects, regions with sizable employment in coal mining or traditional vehicle manufacturing will be disproportionately impacted. The resulting labour market imbalances can be addressed by people's movements within and between countries and training and skilling policies adapted to regional contexts.

The current economic system favours urbanisation, with jobs and skilled labour now concentrated in large urban areas. However, many jobs needed for the transition towards carbon neutrality are not in the most urbanised regions. Further still, green jobs will not automatically be created in regions with declining industries (such as coal mining, traditional vehicle manufacturing, or maritime transportation ports). 

One important field of research should be on mechanisms of geographic mobility of labour (of EU citizens and third country nationals), incorporating a gender perspective to understand how mobility patterns differ and influence workforce dynamics. This is particularly pertinent given the documented impact of gender occupational segregation on labour market outcomes.

Another important research avenue is firm adaptation. Much of the current research is focused on the closing of factories and the subsequent reallocation of labour. However, the great challenge of the green transition is how to prevent existing businesses from closing and to upgrade them in a circular, cost- and resource-efficient manner, and make them more competitive. There is, therefore, a need to study cases of successful transitions that may not involve closing of factories and the policies and practices that enabled them.

Past transitions can provide insight into how to handle economic readjustment in regions strongly impacted by the green transformations. The success of the green and energy transitions hinges on political feasibility. Research is needed to understand what drives feasibility across contexts and how it can be strengthened. Past transitions have forced regions and communities to diversify their economic models. In this regard, they bear many similarities to the green transition. 

To ensure Europe will benefit from current transitions, proposals should employ a whole ecosystem approach and draw from a rich variety of (SSH) disciplines including history, sociology, economics, and geography. Proposals may focus on policies which favoured local job creation, upskilling, labour mobility, and business model diversification. Proposals may also focus on the experiences of workers to provide adaptation lessons for the current transitions. Another research perspective could be the role social conflicts and compromises linked with social partners and how these have shaped past transitions. Lastly, proposals may take into account other key megatrends such as labour-saving technological innovation or demographic changes and evaluate how those change in the context of past and current industrial transformations, and how these impact different groups disproportionately.

Where applicable, proposals should leverage the data and services available through European Research Infrastructures federated under the European Open Science Cloud, as well as data from relevant Data Spaces. Particular efforts should be made to ensure that the data produced in the context of this topic is FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Re-usable).

CONDICOES / ELEGIBILIDADE / CRITERIOS:
">General conditions1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout

As described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes.

Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System.

The page limit for the Part B of the Research and Innovation (RIA) application using lump sum is 50 pages. In addition, it is mandatory to submit a detailed budget table, using the template available in the Submission System.

2. Eligible Countries

As described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide.

3. Other Eligible Conditions

As described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion

As described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds

As described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes

As described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual.

5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement

As described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes.

6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants

Eligible costs will take the form of a lump sum as defined in the Decision of 7 July 2021 authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (2021-2027) – and in actions under the Research and Training Programme of the European Atomic Energy Community (2021-2025). [[This decision is available on the Funding and Tenders Portal, in the reference documents section for Horizon Europe, under ‘Simplified costs decisions’ or through this link: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/docs/2021-2027/horizon/guidance/ls-decision_he_en.pdf]].

In addition, as described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes.

Specific conditions 

described in the [specific topic of the Work Programme]

Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA): 

Application form templates — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System

Standard application form (HE RIA, IA) 

Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations&#xa0;

Standard evaluation form (HE RIA, IA)&#xa0;

Guidance

HE Programme Guide&#xa0;

Model Grant Agreements (MGA)

Lump Sum MGA&#xa0;

Call-specific instructions&#xa0;

Detailed budget table (HE LS)&#xa0;(version 3.3)

Guidance: "Lump sums - what do I need to know?"

Additional documents: 

HE Main Work Programme 2025 – 1. General Introduction

HE Main Work Programme 2025 – 5. Culture, creativity and inclusive society

HE Main Work Programme 2025 – 14. General Annexes

HE Programme Guide

HE Framework Programme 2021/695

HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764 

EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509

Decision authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme

Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment&#xa0;

EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement&#xa0;

Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual&#xa0;

Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions&#xa0;

Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement

INFORMACAO DE SUPORTE:
Online Manual is your guide on the procedures from proposal submission to managing your grant.

Horizon Europe Programme Guide contains the detailed guidance to the structure, budget and political priorities of Horizon Europe.

Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – find the answers to most frequently asked questions on submission of proposals, evaluation and grant management.

Research Enquiry Service – ask questions about any aspect of European research in general and the EU Research Framework Programmes in particular.

National Contact Points (NCPs) – get guidance, practical information and assistance on participation in Horizon Europe. There are also NCPs in many non-EU and non-associated countries (‘third-countries’).

Enterprise Europe Network – contact your EEN national contact for advice to businesses with special focus on SMEs. The support includes guidance on the EU research funding.

IT Helpdesk – contact the Funding & Tenders Portal IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc.

European IPR Helpdesk assists you on intellectual property issues.

CEN-CENELEC Research Helpdesk and ETSI Research Helpdesk – the European Standards Organisations advise you how to tackle standardisation in your project proposal.

The European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for their recruitment – consult the general principles and requirements specifying the roles, responsibilities and entitlements of researchers, employers and funders of researchers.

Partner Search help you find a partner organisation for your proposal.

FONTE OFICIAL: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/opportunities/topic-details/HORIZON-CL2-2025-01-TRANSFO-02.json