INSTRUMENTO: Soutenir la mise en œuvre de la mission «Un pacte pour des sols sains en Europe»
CODIGO: HORIZON-MISS-2026-05-SOIL-02
FONTE: EU Funding & Tenders Portal / Horizon Europe (HORIZON)
DATA_DOWNLOAD: 2026-05-05

NOME OFICIAL: Antimicrobial resistance and antibiotic biosynthesis in soils: developing key understanding and counteractive strategies using a One-Health approach
CALL: HORIZON-MISS-2026-05
CALL TITLE: Supporting the implementation of the Soil Deal for Europe Mission
PROGRAMA: HORIZON - Horizon Europe (HORIZON)
TIPO ACAO: 

DOTACAO:
  2026: EUR 14.000.000

PRAZOS:
ABERTURA: 2026-02-04
DEADLINE: 2026-09-23
MODELO_PRAZO: single-stage

PALAVRAS-CHAVE: Antimicrobial resistance, Soil biodiversity, Soil biology, Soil science

DESCRICAO E IMPACTO ESPERADO:
Expected Outcome:

Activities under this topic will help progress towards the objectives and targets of the Mission Soil and of the EU Soil Strategy for 2030, the Zero Pollution Action Plan, the European One Health Action Plan against antimicrobial resistance as well as the Sustainable Development Goals[1].

Project results are expected to contribute to all the following expected outcomes:

- policymakers, land managers and other relevant stakeholders have an enhanced understanding of antimicrobial resistance development in soils, the key drivers and pathways of soil’s contribution to human and animal exposure to antimicrobial resistant genes and organisms, as well as antibiotic biosynthesis in soils;
- policymakers and land managers have increased access and capacity to implement evidence-based strategies aimed at reducing the risk of antimicrobial resistance development in soils and minimising the exposure of humans and animals to antimicrobial resistant genes and organisms;
- policymakers and other relevant stakeholders benefit from improved access to enriched databases of antibiotics-related genes and antibiotic alternatives from soil microorganisms;
- citizens are more aware of the importance of soil and soil biodiversity for human, animal and environmental health as well as on their potential as a source of molecules of interest for pharmaceutical purposes. 

Scope:

Soil biodiversity plays a major role in human, animal and ecosystem health. Soil microorganisms (bacteria and fungi) have been crucial in the discovery of antibiotics used in human and veterinary medicine. However, soils can also be a hotspot for antimicrobial resistance development and can play a key role in the transfer of antimicrobial resistance genes between organisms and environmental compartments. Antibiotic use is expected to increase globally due to the rising demand for food-producing animals, which may further exacerbate the development of antimicrobial resistance in soils. According to the World Health Organization, antimicrobial resistance is one of the greatest threats to public health[2]. The driving forces for antimicrobial resistance development in soils are however understudied, as well as the role of soils in the exposure of humans and animals to antimicrobial resistance determinants. Moreover, our knowledge of antibiotics-related genes is currently limited, making it challenging to identify new compounds of interest. To better understand and combat antimicrobial resistance development in soils, a One-Health approach is needed.

Proposals should:

- explore the source and dynamics of antimicrobial resistance development and the mechanisms for antibiotic biosynthesis in soils across all relevant land use types. The role of land use, land management practices and other environmental and anthropogenic driving factors should be identified and taken into account;
- analyse the role of soils in the transfer of antimicrobial resistance genes among organisms and environmental compartments and in the exposure of humans and animals to antimicrobial resistance genes and organisms;
- expand databases of antibiotics-related genes and antibiotic alternatives from soil microorganisms;
- develop concrete guidelines for policymakers and land managers to: i) better address the exposure of humans and animals to antimicrobial resistant genes and organisms; and, ii) facilitate the discovery of new molecules of pharmaceutical interest;
- carry out communication and awareness raising activities targeted to citizens on the importance of soil and soil biodiversity for human, animal and environmental health as well as on their potential as a source of molecules of interest for pharmaceutical purposes.

In carrying out the activities, consortia should work in an interdisciplinary way bringing together life sciences, environmental sciences, health sciences and veterinary sciences.

Proposals are expected to collaborate with the projects funded under HORIZON-HLTH-2024-DISEASE-09-01: European Partnership: One Health Anti-Microbial Resistance. Proposals should also demonstrate a route towards open access, longevity, sustainability and interoperability of knowledge and outputs through close collaboration with the EU Soil Observatory and the SoilWise project. Proposals should therefore include dedicated tasks and appropriate resources for collaboration with relevant projects and initiatives and engage in relevant Mission Soil clustering activities.

[1] In particular SDG 3- Good health and well-being, and SDG 15 – Life on Land.

[2] https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/antimicrobial-resistance

CONDICOES / ELEGIBILIDADE / CRITERIOS:
">General conditions1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout

﻿described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes.

Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System.

2. Eligible Countries

described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide.

3. Other Eligible Conditions

described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion

described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds

are described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes

are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual.

5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement

described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes.

6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants

Eligible costs will take the form of a lump sum as defined in the Decision of 7 July 2021 authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (2021-2027) – and in actions under the Research and Training Programme of the European Atomic Energy Community (2021-2025) [[This decision is available on the Funding and Tenders Portal, in the reference documents section for Horizon Europe, under ‘Simplified costs decisions’ or through this link: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/docs/2021-2027/horizon/guidance/ls-decision_he_en.pdf]].

described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes.

Specific conditions 

described in the [specific topic of the Work Programme]

Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA): 

Application form templates — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System

Standard application form (HE RIA, IA)

Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations 

Standard evaluation form (HE RIA, IA)&#xa0;

Guidance

HE Programme Guide&#xa0;

Model Grant Agreements (MGA)

Lump Sum MGA&#xa0;

Call-specific instructions&#xa0;

Detailed budget table (HE LS)&#xa0;

Guidance: "Lump sums - what do I need to know?"

Additional documents: 

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 1. General Introduction

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 12. Missions

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 15. General Annexes

HE Programme Guide

HE Framework Programme 2021/695

HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764

EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509

Decision authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme

Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment

EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement 

Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual&#xa0;

Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions&#xa0;

Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement

INFORMACAO DE SUPORTE:
Online Manual is your guide on the procedures from proposal submission to managing your grant.

Horizon Europe Programme Guide contains the detailed guidance to the structure, budget and political priorities of Horizon Europe.

Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – find the answers to most frequently asked questions on submission of proposals, evaluation and grant management.

Research Enquiry Service – ask questions about any aspect of European research in general and the EU Research Framework Programmes in particular.

National Contact Points (NCPs) – get guidance, practical information and assistance on participation in Horizon Europe. There are also NCPs in many non-EU and non-associated countries (‘third-countries’).

Enterprise Europe Network – contact your EEN national contact for advice to businesses with special focus on SMEs. The support includes guidance on the EU research funding.

IT Helpdesk – contact the Funding & Tenders Portal IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc.

European IPR Helpdesk assists you on intellectual property issues.

CEN-CENELEC Research Helpdesk and ETSI Research Helpdesk – the European Standards Organisations advise you how to tackle standardisation in your project proposal.

The European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for their recruitment – consult the general principles and requirements specifying the roles, responsibilities and entitlements of researchers, employers and funders of researchers.

Partner Search help you find a partner organisation for your proposal.

FONTE OFICIAL: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/opportunities/topic-details/HORIZON-MISS-2026-05-SOIL-02