TITLE: Advancing circular logistics solutions in cities
TOPIC CODE: HORIZON-MISS-2027-04-CIT-CCRI-04
CALL IDENTIFIER: HORIZON-MISS-2027-04
CALL TITLE: Supporting the implementation of the Climate-Neutral and Smart Cities Mission

KEYWORDS: Circular economy, E-Commerce, Urban and regional economics, Urban transport, Urban waste, Urbanization and urban planning, cities, Waste management

=== DESCRIPTION ===
Expected Outcome:

Projects are expected to contribute to all the following outcomes:

- Accelerated transition towards circular economy in the freight transport sector and throughout the urban logistics value chain, contributing to the objectives of the Climate-neutral and Smart Cities Mission and the EU Circular Cities and Regions Initiative (CCRI);
- Increased adoption by logistics operators of new and tested circular systemic logistics solutions, including modular loading units and reusable transport packaging systems tailored for urban delivery settings;
- Improved integration of reverse logistics into urban logistics models to enable higher reuse and recycling rates;
- Optimised resource utilisation in urban logistics through innovative circular economy approaches, leading to significant reductions in material consumption and carbon footprint;
- Enhanced cooperation among urban stakeholders, including local authorities, logistics providers, retailers, and consumers, fostering circular business models and enhancing consumer acceptance. 
 Scope:

The rapid growth of e-commerce and urban logistics has led to an increase in packaging waste, inefficiencies in freight transport, and rising environmental impacts. Current urban logistics systems often rely on disposable packaging and fragmented transport operations, resulting in significant material waste, resource inefficiency and carbon emissions. Addressing these challenges requires innovative circular economy approaches, promoting systemic, innovative, circular and scalable solutions for reducing waste generation, in line with the revised EU Packaging and Packaging Waste Regulation (PPWR)[1], and improving resource efficiency in business-to-business and business-to-consumer logistics.

Building on previously funded projects’ outcomes and leveraging potential complementarities with existing regional circularity hubs and other initiatives (e.g. the CCRI [2] and its related projects [3], as well as the Driving Urban Transition Partnership (DUT)[4]), proposals should address all the following actions:

- Design and develop solutions for innovative, modular, reusable, and recyclable packaging and loading units. The proposed solutions should reduce single-use packaging in urban freight transport and demonstrate the benefits of their use in urban logistics processes, while considering the impact of packaging waste regulations on logistics and delivery models in urban areas.
- Develop and test digital tools and systems for tracking and optimising the use of the loading units as well as for secure and efficient stowage, transport, and handling, by integrating technologies such as Internet of Things, edge computing, Artificial Intelligence and data-driven collaboration platforms (e.g. data spaces), considering technological sovereignty and energy-efficiency.
- Engage urban and local stakeholders, including local authorities, logistics operators, retailers and citizens, in co-designing innovative solutions to implement reusable and recyclable packaging and use parcel lockers and micro-hubs (pick-up points) for returning new items and collecting used items (for the purpose of repair, reuse, remanufacture, repurpose or recycling), thus promoting the transition to circular urban logistics in various product value chains.
- Demonstrate the proposed solutions in real-world pilots in at least two different urban environments, each pilot covering two different types of goods or more (e.g. textile apparel, consumer electronics), in cooperation with logistics service providers, cities, and e-commerce value chain actors. Pilots should also consider reverse logistics systems, and innovative return and reuse schemes.
- Explore and evaluate environmental, social, and economic (e.g. need for new business models and incentive schemes) impacts of circular economy approaches and specifically the potential of reverse logistics systems to enable circular flows of materials, reduce greenhouse gas and pollutant emissions, and support reuse schemes.
- In a co-creation process with local authorities, propose policy recommendations and guidelines to support cities in designing enabling regulatory frameworks and market incentives aligned with local circular economy goals and in integrating circular economy principles into urban logistics related policies, plans[5] and regulations.
- Provide policy recommendations to facilitate the adoption of modular loading units and the integration of sustainable logistics measures into broader urban circular economy strategies across European cities and regions.
 Collaboration with the Cities Mission Platform – through the CIVITAS initiative[6] – and the CCRI is essential. Proposals should include appropriate provisions for activities and resources to support clustering activities and cooperation with the Cities Mission Platform, the CCRI, and the CIVITAS initiative[7]. Proposals should also plan for an active collaboration amongst the projects selected under this topic - for dissemination, evaluation and coordination - facilitated by and within the above mentioned initiatives. Moreover, proposals are expected to ensure that their dissemination and exploitation strategies feature dedicated actions for promoting their results and lessons learned across the Cities Mission Platform, CIVITAS and CCRI websites.

This action supports the follow-up to the July 2023 Communication on EU Missions assessment[8].

null

Activities are expected to achieve TRL 7-8 by the end of the project – see General Annex B.

[1] Regulation - EU - 2025/40 - EN - EUR-Lex

[2] Circular Cities and Regions Initiative

[3] CCRI Projects (e.g. Rewrap: Challenging the Dominance of Single-Use Plastic Wraps | DEFINITE-CCRI)

[4] The DUT Partnership

[5] E.g. within the Sustainable urban mobility planning

[6] https://civitas.eu/

[7] The CIVITAS initiative should establish, through a collaboration agreement set up together with the Cities Mission Platform, clear links with the Mission portfolio for synergies and complementarities.

[8] COM(2023) 457 final and SWD(2023) 260 final

=== CONDITIONS ===
">General conditions

1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout

﻿described in Annex A and Annex E of the Horizon Europe Work Programme General Annexes.

Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System.

2. Eligible Countries

described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

A number of non-EU/non-Associated Countries that are not automatically eligible for funding have made specific provisions for making funding available for their participants in Horizon Europe projects. See the information in the Horizon Europe Programme Guide.

3. Other Eligible Conditions

The following additional eligibility criteria apply:

At least three cities, represented by a local authority or by an entity with an explicit consent from the local authority, each from a different Member State or Associated Country, must participate as beneficiaries. At least one of the three cities must be one of the 112 cities selected for the EU Mission on Climate-Neutral and Smart Cities[[The EU Mission on Climate-Neutral and Smart Cities aims to deliver 100 climate-neutral and smart cities by 2030 and ensure that these cities act as experimentation and innovation hubs to enable all European cities to follow suit by 2050. On 28 April 2022, the Commission announced the 100 EU cities that will participate in the Mission. In addition, 12 cities have been selected from countries associated or expected to be associated the Horizon Europe programme.]].

Subject to restrictions for the protection of European communication networks.

described in Annex B of the Work Programme General Annexes.

4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion

described in Annex C of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5a. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds

are described in Annex D of the Work Programme General Annexes.

5b. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes

are described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes and the Online Manual.

5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement

described in Annex F of the Work Programme General Annexes.

6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants

Grants awarded under this topic will be linked to the following action(s):

HORIZON-MISS-2021-CIT-02-03

Collaboration with the Cities Mission Platform[[Set up by Horizon 2020 project NetZeroCities - Accelerating cities' transition to net zero emissions by 2030, Grant Agreement n. 101036519, and scaled up through topic HORIZON-MISS-2021-CIT-02-03: Framework Partnership Agreement (FPA) for the Climate-Neutral and Smart Cities Mission Platform.]] is essential and projects must ensure that appropriate provisions for activities and resources aimed at enforcing this collaboration are included in the work plan of the proposal. The collaboration with the Cities Mission Platform must be formalized through a Memorandum of Understanding or a collaboration agreement to be concluded as soon as possible after the project starting date.

Eligible costs will take the form of a lump sum as defined in the Decision of 7 July 2021 authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme – the Framework Programme for Research and Innovation (2021-2027) – and in actions under the Research and Training Programme of the European Atomic Energy Community (2021-2025) [[This decision is available on the Funding and Tenders Portal, in the reference documents section for Horizon Europe, under ‘Simplified costs decisions’ or through this link: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/docs/2021-2027/horizon/guidance/ls-decision_he_en.pdf]].

described in Annex G of the Work Programme General Annexes.

Specific conditions

 Not applicable.

Application and evaluation forms and model grant agreement (MGA):

 Application form templates — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System

Standard application form (HE RIA, IA)

Evaluation form templates — will be used with the necessary adaptations 

Standard evaluation form (HE RIA, IA)&#xa0;

Guidance

HE Programme Guide&#xa0;

Model Grant Agreements (MGA)

Lump Sum MGA&#xa0;

Call-specific instructions&#xa0;

Detailed budget table (HE LS)&#xa0;

Guidance: "Lump sums - what do I need to know?"

Additional documents:

 HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 1. General Introduction

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 12. Missions

HE Main Work Programme 2026-2027 – 15. General Annexes

HE Programme Guide

HE Framework Programme 2021/695

HE Specific Programme Decision 2021/764

EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509

Decision authorising the use of lump sum contributions under the Horizon Europe Programme

Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment

EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement 

Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual&#xa0;

Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions&#xa0;

Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement

=== SUPPORT INFO ===
Online Manual is your guide on the procedures from proposal submission to managing your grant.

Horizon Europe Programme Guide contains the detailed guidance to the structure, budget and political priorities of Horizon Europe.

Funding & Tenders Portal FAQ – find the answers to most frequently asked questions on submission of proposals, evaluation and grant management.

Research Enquiry Service – ask questions about any aspect of European research in general and the EU Research Framework Programmes in particular.

National Contact Points (NCPs) – get guidance, practical information and assistance on participation in Horizon Europe. There are also NCPs in many non-EU and non-associated countries (‘third-countries’).

Enterprise Europe Network – contact your EEN national contact for advice to businesses with special focus on SMEs. The support includes guidance on the EU research funding.

IT Helpdesk – contact the Funding & Tenders Portal IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc.

European IPR Helpdesk assists you on intellectual property issues.

CEN-CENELEC Research Helpdesk and ETSI Research Helpdesk – the European Standards Organisations advise you how to tackle standardisation in your project proposal.

The European Charter for Researchers and the Code of Conduct for their recruitment – consult the general principles and requirements specifying the roles, responsibilities and entitlements of researchers, employers and funders of researchers.

Partner Search help you find a partner organisation for your proposal.