INSTRUMENTO: Strategic Nature and Integrated Projects (SNAP/SIP)
CODIGO: LIFE-2026-STRAT-ENV-SIP-two-stage
FONTE: EU Funding & Tenders Portal / Programme for the Environment and Climate Action (LIFE)
DATA_DOWNLOAD: 2026-05-05

NOME OFICIAL: Strategic Integrated Projects - Environment
CALL: LIFE-2026-STRAT-two-stage
CALL TITLE: Strategic Nature and Integrated Projects (SNAP/SIP)
PROGRAMA: LIFE2027 - Programme for the Environment and Climate Action (LIFE)
TIPO ACAO: 

DOTACAO:
  2026: EUR 58.000.000

PRAZOS:
ABERTURA: 2026-04-21
DEADLINE FASE 1: 2026-09-03
DEADLINE FASE 2: 2027-03-04
MODELO_PRAZO: two-stage

DESCRICAO E IMPACTO ESPERADO:
Expected Impact:

Expected Impact:

- By the end of the project: at least substantial contribution to the implementation of the targeted plan/strategy, and mechanisms established to ensure full implementation of the plan/strategy.
- After the project: Full implementation of the plan/strategy.

In relation to those expected impacts, applicants are expected to define, calculate, explain and achieve the expected impacts as described in Award criterion ‘Impact’ of the full proposal evaluation (see Call document).

Objective:

Support the full implementation of the following plans and strategies:

- Circular Economy: National or Regional Circular Economy Action Plans, Strategies, Roadmaps or similar, which are officially approved, and which include specific and measurable actions, or targets, with a clear timeline and are in line with or complement the objectives of the EU Circular Economy Action Plan and, when relevant of the Bioeconomy Strategy.

- Waste: National and regional Waste Management Plans pursuant to Article 28 of the EU Waste Framework Directive and/or Waste Prevention Programmes as requested by article 29 of the EU Waste Framework Directive.

- Water: River basin management plans pursuant to Annex VII to the EU Water Framework Directive, Flood Risk Management Plans pursuant to the EU Floods Directive, Marine Strategies pursuant to the EU Marine Strategy Framework Directive, Drought Management Plans as suggested by Article 13 (5) of the Water Framework Directive.

- Air: Air quality plans pursuant to the EU Ambient Air Quality Directive, National Air Pollution Control Programmes pursuant to the EU National Emission Reduction Commitments Directive.

- Noise: Noise action plans pursuant to the EU Environmental Noise Directive.

Scope:

SIPs should aim at the full implementation of the strategies and plans listed in "Objective". This might not mean that the SIP will cover all actions foreseen in the strategy/plan or that the strategy/plan will be fully implemented during the lifetime of the SIP. However, the SIP shall include strategic actions to catalyse a process and mobilise supplementary commitments and funding that will lead, in due time, to the full implementation of the plan or strategy.

SIPs shall promote the coordination with and mobilisation of other relevant Union, national or private funding sources for the implementation of the complementary measures or actions outside of the SIP in the framework of the targeted plan or strategy, giving preference to EU funding. Within the SIP itself, however, co-funding may not come from other EU funding sources.

SIPs shall actively involve the main stakeholders necessary for the implementation of the targeted plan or strategy. They should be involved in both the design and implementation of the given project. This involvement is expected to be achieved by including them - where possible and reasonable - as associated beneficiaries of the SIP, or through their active participation in the implementation of the SIP itself and/or of the complementary actions.

SIPs should facilitate and result in the building up of strategic capacities among the competent authorities and stakeholders to ensure a long-term sustainability of project results and actions, and to ensure that they will be able to function as co-deliverers of the targeted plan or strategy during or after the end of the SIP.

The SIP complexity requires an adaptive approach in the design of the implementing mechanism. For this reason, SIPs will be implemented based on a revolving programming mechanism structured in phases (i.e. Phase 1, Phase 2, etc.). Each phase should normally last at least 3 years, to reduce administrative burden, although duration might be shorter if properly justified.

See Call document and Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) for a more detailed description of SIPs scope and features.

CONDICOES / ELEGIBILIDADE / CRITERIOS:
">Conditions1. Admissibility conditions: Proposal page limit and layout

described in section 5 of the call document.

Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System.

Please add hyperlinks as embedded links where needed (underscored text). Send the call document through the document publication form to receive the hyperlink within 2 business days max.

2. Eligible countries

described in section 6 of the call document.

3. Other eligibility conditions

described in section 6 of the call document.

4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion

described in section 7 of the call document.

5a. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes

described section 8 of the call document and the Online Manual.

5b. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds

described in section 9 of the call document.

5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement

described in section 4 of the call document.

6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants

described in section 10 of the call document.

Call document and annexes: 

Call document

Application form templates

Standard application form (LIFE SIP and SNAP) — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System

Detailed budget table (LIFE) 

Participant information (LIFE) 

Maps (LIFE) 

Description of sites (LIFE) 

Description of species and habitats (LIFE) 

Implementation overview for the plan/strategy/action plan (LIFE SIP and SNAP) 

Complementary funding plan (LIFE SIP and SNAP) 

Complementary funding declaration (LIFE SIP and SNAP) 

Model Grant Agreements (MGA)

LIFE MGA 

Additional documents: 

LIFE Multiannual Work Programme 2024-2027

LIFE Regulation 2021/783

EU Financial Regulation 2024/2509

Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment 

EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement&#xa0;

Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual&#xa0;

Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions&#xa0;

Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement

INFORMACAO DE SUPORTE:
Please read carefully all provisions below before the preparation of your application.

Consult the FAQs in LIFE website

Get in touch with your National Contact Point (NCP). We want also to draw your attention on the possibility to get support from your NCP. To facilitate such support, it would be beneficial to add your NCP under the “Participants” step of the application, by clicking on “Add contact”. Then, Under “Project role”, use the option “Contact person” and add your NCP’s data.Please read carefully all provisions below before the preparation of your application.

IT Helpdesk – Contact the IT helpdesk for questions such as forgotten passwords, access rights and roles, technical aspects of submission of proposals, etc.

Online Manual – Step-by-step online guide through the Portal processes from proposal preparation and evaluation to reporting on your ongoing project. Valid for all 2021-2027 programmes.

FONTE OFICIAL: https://ec.europa.eu/info/funding-tenders/opportunities/portal/screen/opportunities/topic-details/LIFE-2026-STRAT-ENV-SIP-two-stage