AVISO: UCPM-2026-KAPP-EX
TITULO: Full Scale Exercises
CALL ID: UCPM-2026-KAPP-EX
FRAMEWORK: {'id': 43298203, 'abbreviation': 'UCPM2027', 'description': 'Union Civil Protection Mechanism (UCPM)'}
DEADLINE: 
BUDGET (EUR): 
TYPES OF ACTION: {'status': {'id': 31094502, 'abbreviation': 'Open', 'description': 'Open'}, 'types': [{'typeOfAction': 'UCPM-PJG UCPM Project Grants', 'typeOfMGA': [{'id': 43251282, 'abbreviation': 'UCPM-AG', 'description': 'UCPM Action Grant Budget-Based'}]}], 'plannedOpeningDate': '1770076800000', 'submissionProcedure': {}, 'deadlineDates': ['1779148800000']}
KEYWORDS: 

=== DESCRIPTION ===
Objective:

The overall objective is to improve civil protection preparedness and response to all kinds of disasters inside the Member States/Participating States of the Mechanism by providing a testing environment and a learning opportunity for all actors involved in civil protection assistance interventions: a full-scale exercise.

Themes & priorities:

The scenario for the exercises should build on risk assessments.

Examples, but not exclusively, extreme weather, wildfires, floods, earthquakes, tsunamis, industrial risk, critical infrastructure disruption, marine pollution, epidemic/health risk, CBRN, and multi-sectorial emergencies.

In addition to the main theme, cross-cutting issues such as gender, age, persons with disabilities, human rights, environmental sustainability, green economic practices, digitalisation, resilience in infrastructure, the protection of cultural heritage, etc. are encouraged to be considered and included as relevant.

Proposals that can be funded:

The beneficiaries will design, plan, conduct and self-evaluate one full-scale exercise project in Member States.

The full-scale exercise project must include the following elements and activities (see section 2.2 : minimun requirements):

Realistic and challenging scenario linked to risk assessments
Management and control structures for the project and for the conduct of the exercises
Activation of the Mechanism
Deployment of an EU Civil Protection Team
Deployment of assets and teams of the European Civil Protection Pool (ECPP)
Use of the Common Emergency Communication and Information System (CECIS)
Information exchange between the affected country(ies), participating states and the ERCC
The involvement of relevant national operational structures
EU Host Nation Support guidelines
EU observers
Evaluation, lessons learned and way forward
EU visibility
 Scope:

This call supports exercise projects aiming to design, plan, prepare, implement, conduct and evaluate different civil protection activities including a full-scale exercise in a multi-national scenario as the main event of the project. The scenario should simulate the situation and conditions of all types of disasters calling for the activation of the Mechanism, including the main theme and cross-cutting issues.

The overall objective of the Mechanism is to strengthen the cooperation among Member States/Participating States in the field of civil protection in order to facilitate coordination to improve the effectiveness of the system for preventing, preparing for, and responding to natural and man-made disasters. Any country in the world overwhelmed by a disaster can call on the Mechanism for help. By pooling the civil protection capabilities of the Member States/Participating States, the Mechanism can ensure better protection primarily of people, but also of the natural and cultural environment and of property.

Full background information about European civil protection activities is available at http://ec.europa.eu/echo/what/civil-protection_en.

=== CONDITIONS ===
">Conditions

1. Admissibility Conditions: Proposal page limit and layout

described in section 5 of the call document.

Proposal page limits and layout: described in Part B of the Application Form available in the Submission System.

2. Eligible Countries

described in section 6 of the call document.

3. Other Eligible Conditions

described in section 6 of the call document.

4. Financial and operational capacity and exclusion

described in section 7 of the call document.

5a. Evaluation and award: Submission and evaluation processes

described section 8 of the call document and the Online Manual.

5b. Evaluation and award: Award criteria, scoring and thresholds

described in section 9 of the call document.

5c. Evaluation and award: Indicative timeline for evaluation and grant agreement

described in section 4 of the call document.

6. Legal and financial set-up of the grants

described in section 10 of the call document.

Call document and annexes:

 Call document

Technical Guide for UCPM Full-Scale Exercises

Application form templates

Standard application form (UCPM Prevention and Preparedness) — the application form specific to this call is available in the Submission System 

Detailed budget table (UCPM) 

Letter of support (UCPM) 

Model Grant Agreements (MGA)

UCPM MGA

Additional documents:

 UCPM Work Programmes 

UCPM Decision 1313/2013 

  

EU Financial Regulation 2018/1046  

Rules for Legal Entity Validation, LEAR Appointment and Financial Capacity Assessment 

EU Grants AGA — Annotated Model Grant Agreement 

Funding & Tenders Portal Online Manual 

Funding & Tenders Portal Terms and Conditions 

Funding & Tenders Portal Privacy Statement